---
title: "Language Contact and the Origins of the Germanic Languages"
author: "Peter Schrijver"
date: "2014"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "schrijver-2014-language-contact-germanic.epub.zip"
chunk: "Chapter II §6"
pages: "59-71"
---

## 6. OLD ENGLISH AS EVIDENCE FOR A SUBSTRATUM IN OLD ENGLISH

If a population originally speaking another language had switched to Old English, the sound system of that language—whether it was some form of Celtic, Latin, or something else—may have managed to shine through in the Old English sound system, like the original writing on a palimpsest. It may be worthwhile to concentrate completely on Old English itself and to investigate whether it shows the features of a palimpsest: is it possible to discern two different layers in Old English, one reflecting the speech of the first Germanic colonists who came from the Continent, and the other reflecting the speech of British natives who switched to Germanic? Theoretically, this approach has the advantage that it does not presuppose any knowledge about the speech of the British natives. It is an exercise in finding a substratum language just by observing its traces in the language that engulfed it.

The linguist’s task of distinguishing two layers in the sound system of a language differs in one important respect from the task facing a palaeographer who deciphers a palimpsest. A palimpsest contains two (or more) texts written over one another. Each text is a unit by itself: overwriting does not result in a meaningful merger of the texts. The two layers of a sound system, <a id="p59"></a>however, form one single, functional system of hybrid origin in the same way that a child’s DNA is a single, functional system that results from a merger of both of its parents’ DNA.

There is no straightforward way in which a sound system of such hybrid origin can be reconstituted into the parent sound systems of which it is composed—unless, that is, the substratum language has been identified and consequently the linguist knows which substratum features to look for. In the case of Old English, such knowledge has turned out to be too vague to be usable, so we need to devise a search method that enables us to identify the presence or absence of a substratum without it. As a rule of thumb, a sound system betrays the presence of a substratum (i.e. a language shift event) if one or more of the following criteria are met:

1. The sound system changes in a way that cannot be explained plausibly on the basis of general structural principles, such as economy, simplicity, and symmetry (hence the dice are loaded in favour of an explanation on the basis of that other great cause of change, language contact).
2. The initial state of the sound system does not pre-programme the language to undergo those changes (hence the impetus probably did not come from the language itself but from a contact language).
3. The changes are linked, that is, form a coherent system in themselves (so that in combination with (1) and (2) the idea is strengthened that a foreign sound system is steering the changes).
4. The changes do not spread gradually from a centre to the periphery of the area in which the language is spoken (gradual spread of changes is explained by people speaking to one another across a dialect continuum, not by a common substratum; if there is no gradual spread but the changes are ‘suddenly’ there, that is an argument in favour of a substratum).

The more criteria are met, the more plausible is the idea that a substratum (i.e. a language shift event) triggered the changes involved. Since it makes high demands, the application of this search method probably drastically underestimates the total amount of language shift events in the history of languages. Changes that are known to have been caused by a substratum would easily escape detection by the proposed method: they can be open to an alternative explanation according to (1) or (2); they can be relatively isolated rather than linked serially, thus defying (3); and a feature can emerge as a substratum feature in one dialect before spreading across a dialect continuum in wave-like fashion, so that its substratal origin goes unnoticed by (4).

Take the example of the replacement of the English sounds /θ/ and /ð/[^en2_56] by /t/ and /d/, respectively, in most varieties of Anglo-Irish (<i>think</i> and <i>father</i> are pronounced as <i>tink</i> and <i>fader</i>). The explanation for this change is language contact: native speakers of Modern Irish (Gaelic) would have found <a id="p60"></a>it difficult to pronounce English /θ/ and /ð/ because those sounds do not exist in Modern Irish. Therefore, they replaced them with the phonetically closest equivalents that do exist in Modern Irish, /t/ and /d/. Had the Irish background of the sound change been unknown, linguists would have tried to make sense of it in different ways, and they would have been reasonably successful. Dental slit fricatives, as /θ/ and /ð/ are known to phoneticians, are much rarer sounds than the plosives /t/ and /d/ and the grooved fricatives /s/ and /z/ in the languages of the world, so getting rid of them would make English more ‘normal’. Indeed, this normalization may well have been pre-programmed in the Germanic ancestor of English because all modern Germanic languages have replaced the slit fricatives with /t/ or /d/, except the particularly conservative Icelandic and Faeroese languages and, notably, English itself. In English the old /ð/ was turned into /d/, but /θ/ was preserved and subsequently a new /ð/ was created. It seems that the pre-programming of the loss of /θ/ and /ð/ did not make much of an impact on English, so it probably did not have any impact at all on Irish when it came into contact with English. One might think that turning /θ/ into /t/ would create a large number of homonyms, e.g. <i>thick</i> and <i>tick</i>, <i>third</i> and <i>turd</i>, and would therefore be avoided. This did not happen because in fact Anglo-Irish /t/ and /θ/ do not merge: as old /θ/ became /t/, old /t/ moved slightly out of the way and became an approximant (i.e. the front part of the tongue only approaches but does not come into contact with the front part of the palate). Only the untrained ear confuses the Anglo-Irish pronunciations of <i>third</i> and <i>turd</i>.

So the Anglo-Irish change fails criteria (1) and (2). It fails criterion (3) because it does not form part of a conspicuously large set of sound changes (other fricatives, such as /f/, /v/, and /s/, are left intact). There is no information about the way in which the change spread throughout Anglo-Irish, so criterion (4) is useless. All in all, therefore, the Anglo-Irish change /θ/, /ð/ > /t/, /d/ would go unnoticed as the substratum feature that it is.

But the aim of the search method is not to estimate the number of language shift events that have happened in the past. What is required here is a method by which we can convince ourselves that, in the absence of evidence about a language contact situation, language shift offers a better (and not just an alternative) explanation of observed linguistic changes than all other explanations that could be suggested. Let us now turn to Old English in order to observe how the method works in practice.

### 6.1. Developments of the Old English Vowel System

The Old English system of consonants changed very little between c. 450 and 700, so evidence in favour of (or against) language shift cannot be distilled from it. By contrast, the situation of the vowel system is very different. The initial state is the vowel system of c. 450, which the Anglo-Saxon settlers brought with them to Britain from their homelands in northern Germany and Denmark. This vowel system is accessible to linguistic investigation only <a id="p61"></a>by reconstruction. The procedure is the same as I have outlined for the reconstruction of Highland British Celtic on the basis of Welsh, Cornish, and Breton (II.4.2):

- Draw up all prehistoric (i.e. pre-seventh-century) sound laws of English and of its closest cognates: Frisian, Coastal Dutch (ancient dialects of Dutch along the North Sea coast) and northwestern Saxon, which together with English are called North Sea Germanic.
- Put the sound laws in a relative chronology, one for each language.
- All sound laws that the North Sea Germanic languages have in common are posited to have taken place when those languages still formed a unity, so they are shared innovations.
- Deviate from this procedure only if there is an explicit reason to do so; for example, differences in the conditioning of the sound laws can mean that they are separate sound laws; seemingly identical sound laws occupying different positions in the relative chronologies of the different languages are probably different sound laws (sound laws which are just similar rather than identical are interesting in themselves and require careful consideration, but they are put aside for present purposes).

The result is the following reconstruction of the vowel system of pre-settlement North Sea Germanic:[^en2_57]

**Table: <i>Pre-settlement North Sea Germanic (c. 400)</i>[^en2_58]**

|  | long vowels |  |  | short vowels |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | front | central | back | front | central | back |
| close | <i>ī</i> |  | <i>ū</i> | <i>i</i> |  | <i>u</i> |
| mid | <i>ē</i> |  | <i>ō</i> | <i>e</i> |  | [<i>o</i>] |
| open | <i>(ǣ)</i> |  | <i>ɔ̄</i> |  | <i>a</i> |  |
| diphthongs: <i>ai, au, iu, eu</i> |  |  |  |  |  |  |

The long vowel <i>ǣ</i> existed only in the predecessor of the West Saxon and Kentish dialects of Old English, not in that of Anglian.

In the course of the seventh century, the Old English dialects begin to appear as written languages. By this time, a number of different dialects have formed: Northumbrian in the northeast (north of the river Humber, as the name says) and Mercian, between the Humber and the Thames, are together named Anglian. South of the Thames is West Saxon. The dialect of Kent is for obvious reasons designated as Kentish. At this time all dialects, whatever their differences in other segments of grammar, share the same vowel system, with one small exception: the diphthongs <i>īe</i>, <i>ie</i> exist only in West Saxon.

**Table: <a id="p62"></a><i>The Old English vowel system (c. 700)</i>**

|  | long vowels and diphthongs |  |  |  |  | short vowels and diphthongs |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | front | front + back | front round | central | back round | front | front + back | front round | central | back round |
| close | <i>ī</i> | <i>īo</i> | <i>ȳ</i> |  | <i>ū</i> | <i>i</i> | <i>io</i> | <i>y</i> |  | <i>u</i> |
| mid | <i>ē</i> | <i>ēo</i> | <i>ø̄</i> |  | <i>ō</i> | <i>e</i> | <i>eo</i> | <i>ø</i> |  | <i>o</i> |
| open | <i>ǣ</i> | <i>ēa</i> |  | <i>ā</i> |  | <i>æ</i> | <i>ea</i> |  | <i>a</i> |  |

As can be observed at a glance, the vowel system has changed dramatically in the course of a little more than two centuries. There is a new series of front-to-back diphthongs (<i>io</i>, <i>īo</i>, etc.), and the rounded front vowels <i>y</i> and <i>ø</i> have made an appearance.[^en2_59] So has the long vowel <i>ā</i>, which arose out of earlier *<i>ai</i>. The sound laws that affected the vowel system between c. 450 and c. 700 are varied and complex, but most of them express relatively simple general tendencies, which can be represented as follows:

- <i>Backing in back contexts</i>: the long and short front vowels *<i>i</i>, *<i>e</i>, *<i>æ</i> became opening front-to-back long and short diphthongs <i>io</i>, <i>eo</i>, <i>ea</i> before consonants and vowels that are back (developments include so-called breaking in front of certain consonants and consonant groups, and <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut, which occurred if the following syllable contained <i>a</i>, <i>o</i>, or <i>u</i>). Examples: *<i>melkanan</i> > <i>m<u>eo</u>lcan</i> ‘to milk’; *<i>kældaz</i> > <i>c<u>ea</u>ld</i> ‘cold’ (breaking before <i>ld</i>, <i>lk</i>) *<i>eburaz > <u>eo</u>for</i> ‘boar’; *<i>hæbukaz</i> > <i>h<u>ea</u>fuc</i> ‘hawk’ (Anglian; <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut)
- <i>Opening of diphthongs</i>: the inherited diphthongs * <i>iu</i>, *<i>eu</i>, *<i>æu</i> underwent opening of the second element to become <i>īo</i>, <i>ēo</i> (part of Northumbrian <i>ēa</i>), and <i>ēa</i>, respectively. These merged with the long diphthongs that arose as a result of breaking (see first bullet). The development of *<i>ai</i> to <i>ā</i>, which created a new long vowel phoneme, may be described in terms of opening of the second element as well: *<i>ai ></i> *<i>aæ</i> > <i>aa</i> = <i>ā</i>. Examples: *<i>ainaz</i> > <i><u>ā</u>n</i> ‘one’; *<i>æugān</i> > <i><u>ēa</u>ge</i> ‘eye’; *<i>deupaz</i> > <i>d<u>ēo</u>p</i> ‘deep’; *<i>liudi-</i> > <i>l<u>īo</u>de</i>, <i>l<u>ēo</u>de</i> ‘people’; results coincide with the results of breaking in e.g. *<i>nǣhwaz</i> > <i>n<u>ēa</u>h</i> ‘near’; * <i>līhtaz > l<u>īo</u>ht</i>, <i>l<u>ēo</u>ht</i> ‘light’
- <i>Fronting in front contexts</i>: long and short back vowels (*<i>u</i>, *<i>o</i>, *<i>a</i>) and diphthongs (*<i>io</i>, *<i>eo</i>, *<i>ea</i>) became front vowels before *<i>i</i> and *<i>j</i> in the following syllable (<i>i</i>-umlaut), from which resulted the rounded front vowels <i>y</i> and <i>ø</i> (long or short; /ø/ is conventionally spelled <œ>). Examples: * <i>bankiz</i> > <i>benc</i> ‘bench’ <i>*kuningaz > cyning</i> ‘king’ *<i>dōmijanan</i> > <i>dœ-man</i> (later <i>dēman</i>) ‘to judge, deem’

<a id="p63"></a>The processes of <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut (backing) and <i>i</i>-umlaut (fronting) share a common characteristic: the vowel that was present in the second syllable in the Proto-Germanic forms was anticipated in the first syllable (this is in fact what the term ‘umlaut’ means). More precisely, it is the feature axis ‘front-back’ that copies itself from the second into the first syllable. For instance, if the first syllable contained the rounded, close, <i>back</i> vowel *<i>u</i> and the second syllable contained the unrounded, close, <i>front</i> vowel *<i>i</i>, as in *<i>kuningaz</i> ‘king’, the feature <i>front</i> of the second syllable was drawn into the first, where it replaced the feature <i>back</i> of the *<i>u</i>. The result is a rounded, close, <i>front</i> vowel, i.e. /y/ in <i>cyning</i> (as in French <i>pur</i>, German <i>Brücke</i>). Similarly, if the first syllable contained the unrounded, mid, <i>front</i> vowel *<i>e</i> and the second syllable contained the rounded, close, <i>back</i> vowel *<i>u</i>, as in *<i>eburaz</i> ‘boar’, the feature <i>back</i> of the second syllable was drawn into the first, where it followed (rather than replaced) the feature <i>front</i> of the *<i>e</i>. The result is a mid, front-to-back diphthong, i.e. /eo/ in <i>eofor</i> (/o/ is the back counterpart of /e/ and happens to be also rounded; in English as in most European languages, close and mid back vowels are automatically rounded).[^en2_60]

So the grand scheme behind the radical changes in the vowel system between c. 450 and c. 700 is that back vowels in the first syllable are fronted before front *<i>i</i>, *<i>j</i> in the second syllable (<i>i</i>-umlaut), and front vowels in the first syllable are backed before back *<i>o</i>, *<i>u</i>, *<i>a</i> in the second syllable (<i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut) as well as before certain back consonants or consonant groups (breaking).[^en2_61] The result of fronting in front contexts includes the rise of the new phonemes /y/ and /ø/. The result of backing in back contexts, however, consists of front-to-back diphthongs, which are combinations of vowels that already existed as single vowel phonemes. In this respect, the results of fronting and backing are asymmetrical: fronting <i>could</i> have turned /o/ into a back-to-front diphthong such as */oe/ rather than into the rounded front vowel /ø/, but it did not; similarly, backing <i>could</i> have turned /e/ into a simple back vowel such as /o/ rather than into a front-to-back diphthong /eo/, but again it did not. In this respect, the exact results of fronting and backing are unpredictable and specific to Old English.

### 6.2. Explaining the Developments of the Old English Vowel System: Language Shift or Not?

Let us now investigate whether the changes in the Old English vowel system betray the presence of a substratum, i.e. of a population shifting to Old English and steering its developments, by setting off Old English developments against the criteria that were suggested earlier.

1. The sound system changes in a way that cannot be explained plausibly on the basis of general structural principles, such as economy, simplicity, and symmetry (hence the dice are loaded in favour of an explanation on the basis of that other great cause of change, language contact).

<a id="p64"></a>It seems safe to say that the linguist’s toolbox of general structural principles, however sophisticated, does not contain the gear necessary to turn the vowel system of pre-settlement North Sea Germanic into that of Old English. In fact, the initial state is a rather trivial and common type of vowel system, which betrays no inherent structural inclination to develop into the far from trivial Old English system, with its rounded front vowels and highly uncommon long diphthongs opposed to short ones. But if the development of the vowel system is not amenable to an explanation based on general principles of linguistic change, perhaps the individual changes that affected the vowel system are. The general principle behind those changes is, after all, fairly simple: first-syllable front vowels acquire the feature back from a back vowel in the second syllable, and first-syllable back vowels acquire the feature front from a front vowel in the second syllable; in other words, the second, unstressed syllable is anticipated in the first, stressed syllable. Eventually, unstressed syllables even reduce or lose the relevant features. Perhaps this anticipation is quite a natural thing for a language to do? It has indeed been claimed that languages in which the stressed syllable is marked by greater intensity rather than higher or lower tone, such as is the case in English, naturally have less intensity in the following, unstressed syllables, which predisposes them towards reduction and towards bleeding of their features into the first syllable: umlaut. As it turns out, however, the combination of unstressed vowel reduction and umlaut is just typical of some western European languages, whether they be Romance (e.g. French), Celtic, or Germanic, and it peaks in Germanic languages. It is not a general property of languages with intensity stress at all. Since most linguists speak a western European language, the familiar soon feels as if it is the norm, which in this case it is not. Finnish has had word-initial intensity stress for thousands of years yet shows neither unstressed vowel reduction nor umlaut (what it does have is its reverse, vowel harmony: features of the first, stressed syllable spill over into unstressed syllables). Saami is a close cognate of Finnish and shares its word-initial intensity stress as well as the absence of unstressed vowel reduction, but it does have extensive umlaut. Russian has intensity stress and unstressed vowel reduction but no umlaut. So languages with intensity stress may show umlaut or unstressed vowel reduction, or even both, or they may show neither. The absence of a compelling link between intensity stress, on the one hand, and unstressed vowel reduction and umlaut, on the other, means that we need to look elsewhere for an explanation of the Old English vowel changes. Hence criterion (1) in favour of language shift is met.

1. The initial state of the sound system does not pre-programme the language to undergo those changes (hence the impetus probably did not come from the language itself but from a contact language).

In a general sense, fronting in front contexts (<i>i</i>-umlaut) and backing in back contexts (<i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut and breaking) are attested in Old English and <a id="p65"></a>all its closest relatives within the Germanic language family: the histories of Frisian, Dutch, German, and Norse are littered with phenomena that fall under this heading. So perhaps umlaut phenomena date back to the Proto-Germanic period, around the beginning of our era, when Germanic had not yet diversified into its various daughter branches?

As we saw in section II.6.1, sound laws can be ascribed to a common ancestor if they occur in identical form in identical chronological sequence in the daughter languages. By this token, umlaut fails to make it as a Proto-Germanic development: the sound laws are different in each language, and there are wide chronological differences (Old English had full-fledged <i>i</i>-umlaut when first attested around 700, while Old High German had to wait until around 1100 to reach that stage). The closest match, as always, is between Old English and Old Frisian: the rules for <i>i</i>-umlaut are the same, and they occur earlier than in any other Germanic languages (sixth to early seventh century at the latest). The difference is that <i>i</i>-umlaut operates on a vowel system that has already become slightly different in Old Frisian than in Old English. The rules for breaking and <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut, however, are very different and much more restricted in Old Frisian. At a slightly further remove is Old Norse, which shows extensive <i>i</i>-umlaut but according to partially different sound laws, which operate centuries later than in Old English; Old Norse has a restricted <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut which affects only original short *<i>e</i>. At the furthest remove from Old English in terms of umlaut are two languages: Gothic shows no umlaut whatsoever, but that may have to do with its eccentric position: it is a language that split off from the bulk of Germanic at a particularly early date before it was written down in fourth-century sources. The other language is after Frisian the next closest cognate of English, however: western Dutch shows <i>i</i>-umlaut of only short *<i>a</i> and, perhaps, *<i>u</i>, and no <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut whatsoever (see chapter IV). So while umlaut is a particularly frequent phenomenon in Germanic, it is not omnipresent, and it is not strictly speaking a phenomenon of Proto-Germanic.

Yet the mere fact that umlaut is so frequent in Germanic <i>although</i> it is not a Proto-Germanic phenomenon only adds to the puzzle: what made umlaut so popular among speakers of early medieval Germanic? A conceivable scenario is that umlaut arose at some point in the Germanic-speaking world after the break-up of Proto-Germanic and subsequently spread to the other languages. But how did it spread? Intensive contact among speakers of Germanic across a large area would certainly have been favourable for umlaut to spread like a rolling wave, and it would leave enough leeway for local differences to develop, but it is hard to see how umlaut could become so virulent as to spread across an area that stretched all the way from Britain (English) and Scandinavia (Norse) to northern Italy (High German). A linguistic change that spreads across areas by contact does so because speakers who do not have the change want to identify with speakers who do for some social, economic, or political reason: we want to speak like the people on whom we model our better selves. Hence the spreading of a <a id="p66"></a>linguistic feature presupposes a similar social, economic, or political setting across the area, and this is patently lacking in the case of the early medieval Germanic languages.

Alternatively, it is possible that umlaut was present in Proto-Germanic, not as a set of fully fledged sound laws, but as a predisposition that had just started to emerge as the parent language gradually broke up. If so, Old English umlaut is explainable as the unfolding of an innate tendency whose roots lie on the Continent before the migration period. According to this scenario, other Germanic languages inherited the same innate tendency, which then expressed itself differently in different areas and languages. It is necessary to explain what veiled terms like ‘predisposition’ and ‘innate tendency’ might mean in the real world, and that involves the notion of phonemicization.

Some sound laws start as gradual processes.[^en2_62] Take <i>i</i>-umlaut of * <i>a</i> in Old English. The eventual sound law is *<i>a</i> > <i>e</i> if the following syllable contains *<i>i</i> or *<i>j</i> (*<i>i</i>, *<i>j</i> may themselves be lost or changed subsequently). An example is Proto-Germanic *<i>antiz</i> > Old English <i>ent</i> ‘giant’ (where indeed the <i>i</i> that caused the umlaut was subsequently lost as a result of another sound law). The initial stage of this <i>i</i>-umlaut was nowhere near as drastic as changing <i>a</i> into <i>e</i> but consisted of a slight fronting and closing of [a] (with a sound as in <i>high</i> [haI]) in the direction of [æ] (as in <i>hat</i> [hæt]). This change would not normally have been perceptible to speakers of early Germanic at the time: only someone with a very sharp ear or a trained phonetician might have noticed it. That is because the difference between [a] and [æ] was not functional in Germanic at the time (as it is not in English nowadays). A test of the functionality of the difference between [a] and [æ] in the language is to find two words with different meanings such that the only sound difference between them consists of the fact that the one contains [a] where the other contains [æ]. If you succeed, you have found a so-called minimal pair (i.e. a pair of words that differ from one another only in the feature that is investigated), and you have established that [a] and [æ] are functionally different: they are elevated from the status of phones (sounds) to the state of so-called phonemes. Phones are written in phonetic transcription, in square brackets, as [a], [æ]. Phonemes are written in phonemic (also called phonological) transcription, as /a/ and /æ/. The implication is that /a/ and /æ/ are different psychological entities for speakers of the language, of whose difference they are now conscious. If you fail to find a minimal pair for [a] and [æ], the difference between [a] and [æ] is not phonemic (= subphonemic). In most modern European languages, including English, German, and French, the difference between [a] and [æ] is non-phonemic, and therefore speakers of these languages cannot normally hear the difference even though a trained ear can. An example of a phonemic difference in Modern English is that between [æ] and [ɛ]. While the difference is phonetically just as subtle as that between [a] and [æ], there are in this case minimal pairs which promote the phonetic (sound) difference to a functional, phonemic (mental) difference, <a id="p67"></a>distinguishing between <i>bat</i> [bæt] and <i>bet</i> [bɛt], <i>can</i> [kæn] and <i>ken</i> [kɛn]. As a result, we have established the phonemes /æ/ and /ɛ/ for English. Native speakers of English are aware of the sound difference between the two. By the same procedure, phonetically obvious sound differences can be stamped as phonemic, such as that between English /l/ and /p/ on the basis of minimal pairs such as <i>lot</i> [lɔt] and <i>pot</i> [p<sup>h</sup> ɔt], <i>pope</i> [p<sup>h</sup> oʊp] and <i>pole</i> [p<sup>h</sup> oʊl].

Hence, initially, the effect of <i>i</i>-umlaut in words such as */antiz/ > *[æntiz] was so subtle (to an early Germanic ear, that is) as to be subphonemic. Native speakers would be unaware that a change had occurred at all. A trained ear would notice it and would at the same time be able to establish that it is governed by a strict rule: /a/ automatically changes to [æ] if there is an *<i>i</i> (or * <i>j</i>) in the following syllable, not only in the word */antiz/, but in all words with /a/ in the first syllable and *<i>i</i> or *<i>j</i> in the second syllable, such as */mari/ ‘sea, lake’, */satjan/ ‘to set’, and */gastiz/ ‘guest’, which were pronounced as *[mæri], *[sætjan], and *[gæstiz]. So [æ] was a conditioned variant (conditioned, that is, by the presence of *<i>i</i>, *<i>j</i> in the following syllable) of the phoneme /a/. The conditioned variant was predictable on the basis of its environment. As long as this predictability lasted, [æ] was bound to remain subphonemic, hence subconscious. This situation implies that [æ] would have been unstable: speakers could replace [æ] with the original [a] with impunity, because doing so would not lead to problems of comprehension. There are various ways in which phonemicization of [æ] to /æ/ would put an end to the instability of [æ]:

1. <i>Phonetic distance</i>: if [æ] continued to move in the directions ‘front’ and ‘close’, it would come so close to pronunciations of the phoneme /e/ as to become disassociated with /a/ by sheer phonetic distance; it could merge with the existing phoneme /e/, or it could develop into a new, independent, <i>e</i>-like phoneme. Either way, from that point onwards the effect of <i>i</i>-umlaut on /a/ would be phonemicized and perceptible to speakers. Importantly for linguists who deal with old, written sources, perceptibility means that the phoneme would now be able to enter to the written record.
2. <i>Loss of condition</i>: if the sounds that originally conditioned <i>i</i>-umlaut changed, [æ] would no longer be a predictable variant of /a/, and this would have the same phonemicizing effect as (a). Thus, * /antiz/ > *[æntiz] at a certain point lost its final syllable, which contained the *<i>i</i> that caused the umlaut, resulting in *[ænt]; the effect is immediate phonemicization of the variant in the first syllable, whence the Old English form, written <ent>, phonemically /ent/.
3. <i>Interference in a bilingual setting</i>: if early Germanic, at a stage at which it had */antiz/ > *[æntiz], would attract new speakers whose first language contained a quite different vowel system, including, say, a phoneme /æ/, or a different distribution of [a] and [æ] across phonemes, [æ] could become a phoneme /æ/ in their variant of Germanic. <a id="p68"></a>This process leads to phonemicization without the changes described in (a) and (b): suddenly */antiz/, pronounced *[æntiz], would jump to a new phonological state */æntiz/.

When historical linguists formulate sound laws, they almost invariably (and without saying so explicitly) formulate phonemic rather than phonetic sound laws. They do not bother with the initial stages of sound changes but focus on the finished product. This book is no exception. There are good reasons for doing so. Firstly, phonemicized sound laws have crossed an essential threshold in the sense that their outcome has become psychologically real and recognizable by native speakers. Secondly, historical linguists usually deal with written sources that document past stages of a language. In as far as they are devised by native speakers, writing systems generally encode the conscious, phonemic level rather than the unconscious, subphonemic (phonetic) level of a language. Hence it is generally the phonemic level of a language that is accessible to study by historical linguists. This understandable preoccupation of linguists with phonemic, finished sound laws rather than their subphonemic, unfinished precursors does not diminish the fact that both levels are equally real.

All this is relevant to understanding what is meant by the idea that Proto-Germanic may have had an ‘innate tendency’ or ‘predisposition’ towards <i>i-</i> umlaut. It means that on the subphonemic level, vowels may have already begun to be slightly raised and fronted if the following syllable contained *<i>i</i>, *<i>j</i>. From this starting point, the Germanic daughter languages in the course of time developed their different forms of phonemicized <i>i-</i> umlaut, which are encoded as different sound laws in the historical grammars of the Germanic languages. A similar case could be made for <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut, although it is a lot weaker because <i>a</i>/<i>u</i>-umlaut is a much rarer phenomenon in Germanic languages. The whole idea that umlaut was subphonemically present in Proto-Germanic, it must be remembered, is based on the need to explain the particular virulence of <i>i</i>-umlaut in medieval Germanic languages. If the idea is correct, the seeds of the extensive umlaut phenomena of Old English were indeed sown on the Continent, and explaining umlaut on the basis of a substratum in Britain becomes unnecessary. So the second criterion for assuming a substratum in Old English then fails to be met. There are two reasons not to be altogether satisfied with this approach, however.

Firstly, even if a predisposition towards umlaut was already present in the speech of the Anglo-Saxon colonists of the fifth century, we would like to be able to explain why this relatively fluid predisposition was ultimately phonemicized in the particularly striking and far-reaching umlaut sound laws of Old English, which differ so much from those in other Germanic languages.

Secondly, <i>i</i>-umlaut is not limited to Germanic but is also characteristic of its Celtic neighbour, Highland British Celtic, e.g. *<i>donjos</i> ‘man, person’ > *<i>dynjos</i> > Old British /dyn/ (spelled in Old Breton as <don>, pronounced approximately as French <i>dune</i>) > Breton <i>den</i>, Welsh <i>dyn</i>. When final <a id="p69"></a>syllables were regularly lost around AD 500, <i>i</i>-umlaut was phonemicized (in other words, the stage /dyn/ had been reached by c. AD 500). As we will see in section II.8, a very similar development was characteristic of Irish, too, but was phonemicized differently. So explaining the apparent polygenesis of umlaut in Germanic by turning umlaut into a phonetic tendency of the Proto-Germanic ancestor reintroduces monogenesis and consequently simplifies the explanation of Germanic umlaut, but it does not get rid of polygenesis of <i>i-</i> umlaut in the wider areal context of northwestern Europe. Monogenesis could be restored by assuming, arbitrarily, that Celtic took over the phonetic tendency towards umlaut from Germanic by contact, that Germanic took it over from Celtic, or that both took it over from an unknown third party. But that means that we either settle for polygenesis of umlaut, which undermines the compellingness of the idea of monogenesis in Germanic, or that language contact is required to save monogenesis, which undermines the compellingness of the idea that Old English umlaut is not due to language contact.

Given those difficulties, the best approach is to be both strict and practical: the presence of umlaut in Old English does not require the presence of a British substratum, even though perhaps the details of its unfolding do. If for other reasons than criterion (2) a substratum is required and happens to explain the striking details of the unfolding of umlaut in Old English, that would clearly support the idea that there was a substratum.

Let us turn to the next criterion in favour of substratum influence.

1. The changes are linked, that is, form a coherent system in themselves (so that in combination with (1) and (2) the idea is strengthened that a foreign sound system is steering the changes).

This criterion in favour of a substratum in Old English is fulfilled: a host of Old English sound laws conspire for the vowel of the first syllable to anticipate phonetic features that are located later in the word, which gives rise to the impression that a particular sound system is engineering the changes.

1. The changes do not spread gradually from a centre to the periphery of the area in which the language is spoken (gradual spread of changes is explained by people speaking to one another across a dialect continuum, not by a common substratum; if there is no gradual spread but the changes are ‘suddenly’ there, that is an argument in favour of a substratum).

Since the sound changes involved are prehistoric sound changes, the way in which they have spread cannot be tracked down in our written sources of the seventh and later centuries, by which time the sound changes were ancient history. Yet there are indirect indications that the Old English sound changes between c. 450 and 700 did not behave as a gradual spread from a <a id="p70"></a>centre to its periphery. As is well known in Old English studies, the almost identical vowel systems of the Old English dialects arose by similar processes but with many differences in the details of applying those processes. The differences concern not only the application of <i>i</i>- and <i>a</i>/<i>u-</i> umlaut but also breaking, the influence exerted by word-initial <i>c-</i> and <i>g-</i>, the so-called Anglian smoothing (which turned diphthongs into long vowels), and the so-called second fronting characteristic of one particular Mercian dialect. Processes of change that look similar if described in general terms (such as umlaut, breaking, diphthongization, and monophthongization) upon closer observation break up into rather different sound laws. The result is that cognate words, which had one and the same form in ancestral North Sea Germanic, could turn out quite differently in the various Old English dialects. Compare the following examples:

| North Sea Germanic | Anglian | West Saxon | meaning |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>*hauhaz</i> | <i>hǣh > hēh</i> | <i>hēah</i> | ‘high’ |
| <i>*skǣpaz</i> | <i>scēp</i> | <i>scēap</i> | ‘sheep’ |
| <i>*hauzjan</i> | <i>hēran</i> | <i>hīeran</i> | ‘to hear’ |
| <i>*seukaz</i> | <i>sēc</i> | <i>sēoc</i> | ‘sick’ |
| <i>*eduraz</i> | <i>eodor</i> | <i>edor</i> | ‘enclosure’ |
| <i>*niman</i> | <i>nioman</i> | <i>niman</i> | ‘to take’ |
| <i>*herdijaz</i> | <i>hiorde</i> | <i>hierde</i> | ‘shepherd’ |
| <i>*fallan</i> | <i>fallan</i> | <i>feallan</i> | ‘to fall’ |
| <i>*fatō</i> | <i>featu (fatu)</i> | <i>fatu</i> | ‘vats’ |

Hence we observe that on a macroscopic level the Old English dialects all underwent highly similar and distinctive changes leading up to an almost identical vowel system in all dialects. But we also observe, on a microscopic level, that these changes take the form of slightly different sound laws in the various dialects. Those slightly different sound laws led to a potentially confusing array of differences between the dialects on the level of individual words. The inevitable consequence of these observations is that the similarity of the vowel systems and of the processes leading up to them cannot be explained just on the basis of contact between the speakers of the Old English dialects, because speaker contact should have led to easy mutual comprehension.[^en2_63] Instead, the processes produced such different results that they impaired rather than improved mutual comprehension. It is as if the dialects adopted the same phonemic and phonetic system <i>without</i> contact with one another. That, I submit, is one of the best possible indicators of a common substratum, more explicitly, of a language shift by a non-Anglo-Saxon population to Old English in the period between c. 450 and 700.

<a id="p71"></a>Criteria 1, 3, and 4 in favour of language shift steering change are applicable to the developments of the Old English vowel system, with criterion 2 remaining inconclusive. On balance, it is therefore likely that a substratum language was involved in the formation of Old English. One of the features of that substratum language is that it shows a particular system of long and short diphthongs as well as extensive anticipation of second syllables in the first syllable (umlaut), which involves the rise of diphthongs and rounded front vowels in the first syllable. That is a very specific profile to work with for someone on the hunt for possible candidates.
