---
title: "Language Contact and the Origins of the Germanic Languages"
author: "Peter Schrijver"
date: "2014"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "schrijver-2014-language-contact-germanic.epub.zip"
chunk: "Chapter 4"
pages: "122-157"
---

# IV. <a id="p122"></a>The Origins of Dutch

DOI: 10.4324/9780203001912-4

## 1. NON-ASPIRATION OF <i>p, t, k</i>

Together with English dialects in Scotland, Westphalian dialects of German, and Swedish dialects in Finland, the Dutch language has lost the aspiration of Proto-Germanic [p<sup>h</sup>, t<sup>h</sup>, k<sup>h</sup>]. No doubt the loss of aspiration in those dialects occurred independently of one another: they belong to different branches of the Germanic family tree, and all of the closest relatives of unaspirated dialects do have aspiration. If the loss of aspiration was independent, it may well have been caused by different factors that are specific to each unaspirated dialect. In the case of Swedish in Finland, aspiration loss is bound to be connected with language contact. Swedish in Finland arose in a bilingual setting: Swedish originally had aspiration, and Finnish did not. The loss of aspiration is therefore probably due to the influence of Finnish speakers who became bilingual. The case of Dutch may be similar, but the language contact situation that may have caused the loss of aspiration – Germanic and Latin in the early Middle Ages – is more remote in time and requires intricate reconstruction before it can be taken seriously as an explanation. That reconstruction is the theme of the present chapter.

At this point of the argument, three reasons can be produced that support the idea that the loss of aspiration in Dutch was caused by early contact with Latin. The first is that studies of the phonology of Modern Dutch plosives (<i>p</i>, <i>t</i>, <i>k</i>, <i>b</i>, <i>d</i>) reveal that Dutch sides with Romance languages such as French and Spanish rather than with its closest relatives, German and English (Kager 2007). The second reason is one of geography: Flemish as well as southern and central Dutch dialects lack aspiration of <i>p</i>, <i>t</i>, <i>k</i>, but those of the Dutch northeast preserve it. That is, aspiration is preserved only in the dialects that are removed furthest from French. The final reason to think that contact with Romance may have been responsible for the loss of aspiration in Dutch is that the previous chapter has placed lost varieties of Romance in the present-day Dutch-speaking areas of Dutch and Belgian Limburg as well as in the Rhineland as far north as Cologne, i.e. well north of the present-day linguistic border between French and Dutch.

There are two potential obstacles to embracing the idea that loss of aspiration in Dutch is due to contact with Romance in the early medieval period. <a id="p123"></a>First of all, it is unclear when Dutch lost aspiration. The absence or presence of aspiration in Dutch <i>p</i>, <i>t</i>, <i>k</i> is not indicated in spelling, nor has it ever been. We know about non-aspiration only by listening to present-day spoken Dutch and by studying modern dialect descriptions that care to mention this feature, which do not go back in time beyond the twentieth century. As a consequence, loss of aspiration may be attributed to any period between, say, the first and the nineteenth century. That makes it very difficult to be confident about connecting the phenomenon to any specific historical scenario. Who is to say whether loss of aspiration in Dutch is due to contact with Late Latin speakers in the early Middle Ages rather than to, say, the well-known influence of French language and culture on the upper-class Dutch of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries?

The second obstacle to attributing aspiration loss to early medieval contact with Romance is that there may have been another vehicle for the same process. We saw earlier that Westphalian German dialects lack aspiration and that German dialects along the Lower Rhine around Cologne do too. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the towns of Holland were population sinks which attracted large numbers of immigrants from other parts of the Netherlands as well as from neighbouring Germany. In as far as those German immigrants came from Westphalia and the Rhineland, they may well have introduced non-aspiration into the Netherlands, which subsequently spread to the countryside surrounding the Dutch towns. Yet a closer investigation gives a twist to this matter: non-aspirating dialects in Westphalia happen to be dialects spoken to the south and west of the town of Münster,[^en4_1] which are adjacent to the Netherlands and to the Lower Rhine dialects that lack aspiration. So we are confronted with a united region of non-aspiration, encompassing a large Dutch and an adjacent, small German area (remember that this is a dialect continuum and that there are no sharp linguistic boundaries). Since this is a single region, aspiration loss in it probably had one and the same cause. If non-aspiration in Dutch spread from the German Lower Rhine and adjacent Westphalia, this brings us back to contact with Romance anyway, because Romance influence on Rhineland German has already been established in chapter III.

Given such complications, attributing non-aspiration of <i>p</i>, <i>t</i>, <i>k</i> in Dutch to early medieval contact with Romance is just an attractive guess. In order to turn it into something more substantial, we need to find out whether medieval Romance influence on Dutch betrays itself elsewhere in the Dutch language. If Romance influence can be shown more clearly for other aspects of Dutch, non-aspiration can hitch a ride with them.

## 2. <i>i</i>-UMLAUT IN EASTERN AND WESTERN DUTCH

A phenomenon that characterizes all medieval and modern Germanic languages is <i>i</i>-umlaut: a vowel in the stressed syllable of the word, which is usually the first syllable, is changed under the influence of an original *<i>i</i> or *<i>j</i> in the following syllable. An example is the Proto-Germanic verb for ‘to put, to set’, *<i>satjan</i>: its stressed vowel, * <i>-a-</i>, is affected by the *<i>-j-</i> in the second syllable, <a id="p124"></a>as a result of which *<i>-a-</i> becomes <i>-e-</i>: *<i>setjan</i>. Other changes affect this word, which ends up in the various medieval Germanic languages as follows:

| <i>*satjan</i> > <i>*setjan</i> > | Old English <i>settan</i> > <i>set</i> |
| --- | --- |
|  | Old Frisian <i>setta</i> |
|  | Old Norse <i>setja</i> |
|  | Old Saxon <i>settian</i> |
|  | Old High German <i>sezzen > setzen</i> |
|  | Old Dutch <i>settan</i> > <i>zetten</i> |

The process of <i>i</i>-umlaut belongs to the early medieval period. Hence the original, unaffected vowel is preserved in the fourth-century Germanic language called Gothic, where the verb is <i>satjan</i>. Although all Germanic languages – apart from Gothic – undergo <i>i</i>-umlaut, the exact rules that govern its operation are different for each individual language. For instance, a short * <i>i</i> was lost so early in Dutch and German that it failed to produce <i>i</i>-umlaut, as in *<i>gastiz</i> > Old High German <i>gast</i>, Middle Dutch <i>gast</i> ‘guest’. In other Germanic languages, however, this word did undergo <i>i</i>-umlaut, e.g. in Old Norse <i>gestr</i>, Old English <i>giest</i>, because their rules for <i>i</i>-umlaut were slightly different. In general, Dutch and German stick very closely to one another: their rules are practically identical, all vowels are affected, and all are affected in the same way. This can be illustrated by the following list of words from the Modern Dutch dialect of Tilburg (Dutch Brabant)[^en4_2] and their Modern High German counterparts.

**Table: <i>i-Umlaut in Dutch and German</i>**

| original vowel | <i>i</i>-umlaut? | Proto-Germanic form before <i>i</i>-umlaut | Dutch (Tilburg) | German | English cognate or meaning |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>*a</i> | yes | <i>*mari</i> | [mer] | <i>Meer</i> | <i>mere</i> |
|  | no | <i>*dagaz</i> | [dax] | <i>Tag</i> | <i>day</i> |
| <i>*u</i> | yes | <i>*hrugjaz</i> | [rə̈x][^en4_3] | <i>Rücken</i> | <i>ridge</i> |
|  | no | <i>*wulfaz</i> | [wʊləf] | <i>Wolf</i> | <i>wolf</i> |
| <i>*ǣ</i> | yes | <i>*skǣri-</i> | [sxɛːr] | <i>Schere</i> | <i>shears</i> |
|  | no | <i>*slǣpanan</i> | [slɔːpə] | <i>schlafen</i> | <i>to sleep</i> |
| <i>*ō</i> | yes | <i>*fōljanan</i> | [vylə] | <i>fühlen</i> | <i>to feel</i> |
|  | no | <i>*blōmān</i> | [blum] | <i>Blume</i> | <i>bloom</i> |
| <i>*au</i> | yes | <i>*raukjanan</i> | [rə̈ːkə] | <i>räuchern</i> | (to smoke, e.g. fish) |
|  | no | <i>*hlaupanan</i> | [lʊːpə] | <i>laufen</i> | <i>to leap</i> |

The vowels that are affected by <i>i</i>-umlaut are so-called central and back vowels, which are produced by leaving the tongue in its neutral position (i.e. not doing anything special with it, as in the case of <i>a</i>, a central vowel) or by retracting the tongue backwards from its neutral position (as in the case of <i>o</i>, <a id="p125"></a><i>u</i>, hence the term back vowels). Original front vowels, which are produced by slightly protracting the tongue, as in the case of <i>i</i>, <i>e</i>, are generally not affected by <i>i</i>-umlaut. What <i>i</i>-umlaut does is turn central and back vowels into front vowels whenever they are followed by the front vowel <i>i</i> or the front consonant <i>j</i> in the next syllable. So original *<i>mari</i> ‘lake’ has a central vowel <i>a</i> in the first syllable and a front vowel <i>i</i> in the second syllable. <i>i</i>-Umlaut turns the central vowel <i>a</i> into the front vowel <i>e</i>, and the result is *<i>meri</i>. After some time and a number of other sound changes, *<i>meri</i> turns into Tilburg Dutch [mer], standard Dutch <i>meer</i>, German <i>Meer</i>, and English <i>mere</i>. Similarly, Proto-Germanic *<i>fōljanan</i> ‘feel’ has a long back vowel *<i>ō</i> in the first syllable and a front consonant *<i>j</i> in the second. Here <i>i</i>-umlaut turns the long back vowel into its front counterpart *<i>ø¯</i> (as in French <i>feu</i>), so that *<i>fōljanan</i> becomes *<i>fø¯ljan</i>. Here, too, many subsequent changes affect the word, which ends up as Tilburg Dutch [vylə], German <i>fühlen</i>,[^en4_4] and, with the loss of lip rounding that is typical of English, <i>feel</i>. What all offspring of *<i>fōljanan</i> have in common is a front vowel in the first syllable which arose as a result of <i>i</i>-umlaut.

There is a striking limitation to the close correspondence between German and Dutch, however: it occurs only in the Dutch dialects of the eastern half of the Netherlands and Flanders. In the west, those dialects are flanked by a bundle of dialect boundaries, so-called isoglosses, that run from the southern coast of the IJsselmeer near Amersfoort in a southwesterly direction until they hit the linguistic boundary between Dutch and French near Geraardsbergen (Flanders). West of that bundle, dialects used to be spoken that are unique among the Germanic languages: they underwent <i>i</i>-umlaut only of originally short <i>a</i>, and just possibly also of short <i>u</i>, but definitely not of the other vowels. These are the dialects of Western Dutch, which are of special importance because the Modern Dutch standard language is largely based on them. Let us reproduce the diagram above and replace the German forms with their Western Dutch (i.e. standard Modern Dutch) forms:

**Table: <i>i-Umlaut in Western and Eastern Dutch</i>**

| original vowel | <i>i</i>-umlaut? | Proto-Germanic form before <i>i</i>-umlaut | Eastern Dutch (Tilburg) | Western Dutch (standard) | English cognate or meaning |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>*a</i> | yes | <i>*mari</i> | [mer] | <i>meer</i> [e] | <i>mere</i> |
|  | no | <i>*dagaz</i> | [dax] | <i>dag</i> [ɑ] | <i>day</i> |
| <i>*u</i> | yes | <i>*hrugjaz</i> | [rə̈x] | <i>rug</i> [ə̈] | <i>ridge</i> |
|  | no | <i>*wulfaz</i> | [wʊləf] | <i>wolf</i> [ɔ] | <i>wolf</i> |
| <i>*ǣ</i> | yes | <i>*skǣri-</i> | [sxɛːr] | <i>schaar</i> [a] | <i>shears</i> |
|  | no | <i>*slǣpanan</i> | [slɔːpə] | <i>slapen</i> [a] | <i>to sleep</i> |
| <i>*ō</i> | yes | <i>*fōljanan</i> | [vylə] | <i>voelen</i> [u] | <i>to feel</i> |
|  | no | <i>*blōmān</i> | [blum] | <i>bloem</i> [u] | <i>bloom</i> |
| <i>*au</i> | yes | <i>*raukjanan</i> | [rə̈ːkə] | <i>roken</i> [o] | (to smoke, e.g. fish) |
|  | no | <i>*hlaupanan</i> | [lʊːpə] | <i>lopen</i> [o] | <i>to leap</i> |

<a id="p126"></a>The examples illustrate that in Western Dutch *<i>a</i> and *<i>u</i> each have two different outcomes, one front and one central/back, according to whether they underwent <i>i</i>-umlaut or not. As we will see later on, the status of <i>i</i>-umlaut of *<i>u</i> is problematic, but apart from that complication the situation in Western Dutch agrees with Eastern Dutch, German, and the rest of Germanic. Following Goossens (1980), we call this primary <i>i</i>-umlaut because it appears to be the oldest stage of umlaut. But *<i>ā</i>, *<i>ō</i>, and *<i>au</i> each have just one outcome, which is a central or back vowel that did not undergo <i>i</i>-umlaut, even though it should have undergone <i>i</i>-umlaut where an *<i>i</i> or *<i>j</i> was present in the second syllable. <i>i</i>-Umlaut of *<i>ā</i>, *<i>ō</i>, *<i>au</i>, and other vowels (including *<i>u</i>) is called secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut. Secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut did not affect Western Dutch. The fact that Western Dutch is the only type of Germanic to behave in this way is what makes it so special. Since it sticks out among the Germanic languages, it calls for an explanation.

## 3. WESTERN DUTCH

The Western Dutch area comprises the Belgian provinces of West and East Flanders, the extreme west of the Belgian provinces of Brabant and Antwerp, and the extreme west of the Dutch provinces of North Brabant and Utrecht, as well as the entirety of the Dutch provinces of Zeeland, South Holland, and North Holland. The total area is relatively small (approximately 1000 square kilometres). Before the large-scale land reclamations and the construction of dikes, which started by the eleventh century, the inhabitable area was considerably smaller than it is nowadays and very sparsely populated. Most of the land was too wet and boggy to be hospitable to long-term settlement, being little more than a large estuary formed by the Rhine, Maas, and Schelt and consequently prey to periodic inundations by the rivers and the sea. The first large-scale reclamations were followed by urbanization, first of all in Flanders, where towns expanded greatly between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. Examples are Gent, Brugge, Aalst, and Ypres. In Holland, the process started with the towns of Utrecht and Dordrecht, but here massive urbanization took off only in the fifteenth century. Medieval towns were population sinks. The average life expectancy of medieval man ranged between thirty and forty years,[^en4_5] but in towns disease and unhealthy living conditions shortened the life spans of their inhabitants even further. As a consequence, towns generated a constant flow of immigration, which was required to sustain them.

So large-scale land reclamation and the successful development of towns entailed that people moved into the Western Dutch area from outside. This population influx must have originated primarily from the higher ground and more densely populated areas that lay to the east of Holland and Zee-land and to the east and south of Flanders. The linguistic map of Western Dutch can be expected to reflect this. First of all, we expect that Western <a id="p127"></a>Dutch is linguistically a composite: the dialects of the early medieval natives came into contact with a variety of dialects spoken by immigrants. This phenomenon is well attested for Holland from the late medieval period onwards,[^en4_6] but it must have had predecessors stretching back to the early medieval period. Second, as immigrants moved into the Western Dutch area from the east and south, their dialects followed them. The result is that ancient dialectal boundaries may have moved in the same direction. For example, based on data from nineteenth- and twentieth-century dialectological research, the western boundary of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut runs from approximately Hilversum (Utrecht) in the north to Geraardsbergen (East Flanders) in the south. Goossens demonstrated that this was more or less its position during the later medieval period.[^en4_7] If we were to speculate on its position during the early medieval period, the demographic history of the Western Dutch area would lead us to assume that it ran approximately at the same position as today or, if not the same, then more eastwards rather than westwards.

The expectations that the Western Dutch area is dialectally mixed in origin and shows native features as well as features that derive from the east and south are borne out by the investigations of many generations of researchers. Yet the data are more complex than those expectations would lead us to assume, and they leave a number of knotty problems, which will be addressed subsequently. These problems come under two general headings: Coastal Dutch and spontaneous vowel fronting.

## 4. COASTAL DUTCH

The Western Dutch area contains the debris of a lost variety of Germanic that was probably native to the area in the early medieval period, before large-scale land reclamation and urbanization injected immigrants into the area from the south and east. This variety was more akin to Frisian and English than to Eastern Dutch, which, as we saw earlier, sides with German in as far as <i>i</i>-umlaut is concerned. It will be labelled Coastal Dutch.[^en4_8] Coastal Dutch survives in the form of individual words and names in Western Dutch, some of which continue in the Modern Dutch standard language. Its most striking feature is that Coastal Dutch—unlike Western Dutch—underwent full-flung <i>i</i>-umlaut and that it did so in the manner of English and Frisian. Here are a number of examples of typically Coastal Dutch <i>i</i>-umlaut:[^en4_9]

(1) *<i>ū</i> > * <i>ȳ > ī</i> in *<i>hūdjan ></i> *<i>hȳdjan ></i> Middle Coastal Dutch <i>hīden</i> ‘to hide’; also in place names ending in <i>-hīde</i>, where it means ‘harbour’, as in <i>Coxhyde</i> (West Flanders, 1270), present-day <i>Coxijde</i>, locally pronounced as [kɔksidə]; and <i>Palvoetzide</i> (Zeeland, 1351).

This contrasts with ‘normal’ Middle Dutch <i>hūden</i> ‘to hide’ but agrees with Old English <i>hȳdan</i> > <i>hīdan</i> > Modern English <i>hide</i> and with place <a id="p128"></a>names such as <i>Rother-hide</i>. Its Old Frisian cognate <i>hēda</i> ‘to hide’ shows <i>i</i>-umlaut as well but has <i>ē</i> rather than <i>ī</i>.

Other examples are Middle Coastal Dutch <i>hyrlant</i> (1187; <i>y</i> = probably [ī]) ‘hired land’, from *<i>hūr-i-</i> ‘hire’, which also survives in Old Frisian <i>hēre</i> and Old English <i>hȳr</i> > Modern English <i>hire</i>; and Modern Dutch <i>kies</i> ‘molar’ from *<i>kūs-i-</i> as in Old Frisian <i>kēse</i>, beside Middle Western Dutch <i>kuyse</i>, which did not undergo <i>i</i>-umlaut.

(2) *<i>ō ></i> *<i>ø¯ ></i> *<i>ē > ie</i> in *<i>ga-dōb-i-</i> ‘fitting’ > *<i>gadø̄bi-</i> > *<i>gadēb ></i> Middle Coastal Dutch <i>on-ghedieve</i> ‘unfitting’ (with <i>on-</i> = English <i>un-</i>), with a development of the vowel much as in Old Frisian <i>unidēve</i> ‘improper’.

This contrasts with Middle Western Dutch <i>onghedoeve</i>, which has written <oe> for what phonetically was approximately [ō], so without (secondary) <i>i</i>-umlaut.[^en4_10]

(3) *<i>ǣ ></i> *<i>ē > ie</i> as in *<i>lǣkijaz</i> ‘leech’ > *<i>lēki ></i> Middle Coastal Dutch <i>lieke</i> and <i>lēke</i>, corresponding to English <i>leech</i> rather than Middle Western Dutch <i>lāke</i>, where <i>i</i>-umlaut is regularly absent. Similarly *<i>mǣljan</i> ‘to paint’ > Middle Coastal Dutch <i>mielen</i>, which contrasts with Middle Dutch <i>mālen</i>, Old High German <i>mālōn</i>.

The *<i>ǣ</i> that stands at the beginning of this development is a typically Coastal Dutch sound, with correspondences in Old English and Old Frisian. Its counterpart in all other medieval Germanic languages, including Dutch, is <i>ā</i>. The <i>ǣ</i> / <i>ā</i> split is an ancient dialectal split which has nothing to do with <i>i</i>-umlaut. Its Proto-Germanic source is *<i>ǣ</i>, which shows that Germanic languages such as Coastal Dutch that have <i>ǣ</i> preserved (or reverted to) an ancestral state. An example of a word containing this vowel is Modern Zee-land Dutch dialect [sxæp] ‘sheep’, which reflects the Coastal Dutch form and corresponds to Old English <i>scēap</i>, Old Frisian <i>skēp</i>. It contrasts with Old High German <i>scāf</i>, Old Saxon <i>skāp</i>, and Dutch <i>schaap</i>.

(4) *<i>au ></i> *<i>ā ></i> *<i>ē > ie</i> as in *<i>staumjan</i> ‘to steam’ > Modern Dutch (North Holland dialect) <i>stiemen</i> ‘to steam’, which agrees with Old English <i>stīeman</i> ‘to steam’ rather than with Modern Western Dutch <i>stomen</i>, which lacks <i>i</i>-umlaut.

The first stage in the development of * <i>au</i> (4) is the monophthongization of *<i>au</i> to *<i>ā</i>. This has nothing to do with <i>i</i>-umlaut, representing an early development typical of Coastal Dutch, Frisian, and part of Old Saxon. It occurs in a number of early Coastal Dutch place names, e.g. <i>Vronan-slat</i> (1125–1150, South Holland) < * <i>-slauta-</i> ‘ditch, canal’ and <i>Datnesta</i> (820–822, copy 941; East Flanders) < *<i>daud-</i> ‘dead’. The same development occurs in common nouns such as Middle Dutch <i>bāken</i> ‘beacon’ < * <i>baukna-</i> and <i>sāde</i> ‘sod’ < * <i>sauθō</i>. The normal Middle Western Dutch equivalents of those words show *<i>au > ō</i>: <i>slōt</i> ‘ditch’, <i>dōt</i> ‘dead’, <i>bōken</i> ‘beacon’, <i>sōde</i> ‘sod’.

<a id="p129"></a>Similarly, old *<i>ai</i> became <i>ā</i> in Coastal Dutch, just as it did in Frisian and English: Modern Dutch <i>ladder</i> ‘ladder’ originated from Coastal Dutch *<i>lādder</i>, which itself goes back to *<i>hlaidra-</i>. Its cognates are Old English <i>hlædder</i>, Modern English <i>ladder</i>, and Old Frisian <i>hladder</i>, which show the same development as Coastal Dutch.[^en4_11] In other Dutch dialects, *<i>hlaidra-</i> developed into <i>lēder > leer</i>. So the development of *<i>ai</i> and *<i>au</i> to *<i>ā</i> in Coastal Dutch confirms the idea that it joined Frisian rather than Dutch and German as far as <i>i</i>-umlaut is concerned.

As is shown by examples such as <i>hīden</i> < *<i>hȳdjan</i> and <i>onghedieve <</i> *<i>gadø̄bi-</i>, Coastal Dutch eliminated the rounded front vowels <i>ȳ</i> and <i>ø̄</i> by unrounding them to <i>ī</i> and <i>ē</i> (which later became <i>ie</i>, a diphthong, in Middle Dutch and long [iː] in some modern western dialects). It agrees in this with later Old English and Old Frisian. Unrounding also affected the short * <i>y</i> that resulted from <i>i</i>-umlaut of short *<i>u</i>:

> Coastal Dutch <i>pit</i> and <i>pet</i> ‘pit’ < *<i>pyt</i> < *<i>putjaz</i>
>
> Coastal Dutch <i>brig</i> and <i>breg</i> ‘bridge’ < * <i>brygg <</i> *<i>brugjō</i>

The English translations are cognates. They show that English underwent the same development, and so did Frisian. Dutch and German, on the other hand, in general retained the rounded front vowel: Dutch <i>put</i> [pə̈t], German <i>Pfütze</i> [pfytsə], and Dutch <i>brug</i> [brə̈x], German <i>Brücke</i> [brykə].

It is generally agreed that all these similarities between Coastal Dutch, Frisian, and English date from the early medieval period and that they are connected with the same population movements that brought the Anglo-Saxons to Britain. In the later Roman period, the North Sea and Channel coasts were frequently raided by pirates from the north. The general Roman term for those raiders was <i>Saxones</i>, Saxons, a name that no doubt covered various ethnic groups. From the early fifth century onwards, when Roman control of the area was completely given up, raiding was accompanied by settlement. Between the fifth and eighth centuries, a common culture joined the English and Continental sides of the North Sea and the Channel. In the estuaries of the Rhine, Maas, and Schelt, this culture is connected with the name of the Frisians. The Frisians controlled the estuaries and therefore also the trade routes along the coast and with Britain. Where the land was threatened by periodic inundations, people threw up artificial mounds, called <i>terpen</i> or <i>wierden</i>, on which they built their farmsteads. Excavations in present-day Frisia have revealed the wealth that the inhabitants of this region were capable of accumulating.

The Frisians’ main trading centre was the town of Dorestad, which lay southeast of Utrecht at the junction of the Rhine and the Lek near the remnants of an old Roman fort along a stretch of the old <i>limes</i> that had passed out of Roman control as early as the middle of the third century. Whether there was a trickle of population continuity between the Roman <a id="p130"></a>and the early medieval period is unclear. We do know that the town flourished already during the first half of the sixth century, when a mint master called Madelinus, who came from Maastricht, set up shop here. By the late seventh century, the Franks, who controlled centres of power along the Maas in eastern Belgium and in the German Rhineland, had gained control over their western neighbours and began casting their eyes towards the northwest. Sometime around 689, the Franconian ruler Pippin gained a victory over the Frisians under Redbad in the Battle of Dorestad. In 695– 696, Pippin appointed the Anglo-Saxon Willibrord as bishop in Utrecht with the specific assignment to convert the heathen Frisians to Christianity. As usual in those days, Franconian power plays and missionary activities went hand in hand. Although it took the best part of the eighth century to subdue and convert the Frisians, the combined approach was so successful that Franconian power in the Low Countries was there to stay.[^en4_12]

These historical data are mirrored by linguistic history. Coastal Dutch is the language of the ‘Saxon’ pirate-settlers of late Antiquity and the early medieval period. It is an early form of Frisian. One might object to using the label Frisian for Coastal Dutch in Flanders, because as far as we know Flanders was never part of the realm of the Frisians, which did include North and South Holland and Zeeland. As so often in similar cases, however, historians and linguists use the term <i>Frisian</i> with different meanings. For a historian, Frisians are persons who lived in Frisia and took part in aspects of its culture to such an extent that this shaped a common identity. To linguists, Frisians are people who spoke Frisian. The two do not always match.

Coastal Dutch—Frisian in the linguistic sense of the word—was gradually replaced by Western Dutch, first of all in Flanders, followed by Holland, then Zeeland, and finally the north of North Holland, where Frisian may still have been spoken in the seventeenth century. It survives in the modern province of Friesland as well as in enclaves further east in northwestern Germany. The gradual replacement of Coastal Dutch is usually connected with the growing influence of eastern and southern Dutch dialects, which followed the Franconian march towards the west that started in the late seventh century. The land reclamations and urbanization of later centuries intensified the Franconian influx and put additional pressure on Coastal Dutch.

Through the excavation of Coastal Dutch and some of its linguistic features from Western Dutch soil, linguists have identified the native element in the Western Dutch area. But this is not to say that Coastal Dutch was the only language present in the early medieval Western Dutch area. Since Coastal Dutch, like English, is an immigrant language, one wonders what the natives of the Western Dutch area spoke in the fifth century. As in the case of Britain, Celtic and Latin are the best contenders,[^en4_13] but preciously little is known about this.

## <a id="p131"></a>5. SPONTANEOUS VOWEL FRONTING

We have seen that Coastal Dutch has fully developed <i>i</i>-umlaut of the type that is also attested in Frisian and English, and that Eastern Dutch has fully developed <i>i</i>-umlaut, too, although of a different type which is also found in German. Western Dutch, on the other hand, underwent only so-called primary <i>i</i>-umlaut, which affected short *<i>a</i> and possibly *<i>u</i>, whilst long vowels and diphthongs remained unaffected. Even though complex enough, this is not the entire story, for Western Dutch contains a number of words which look as if they underwent <i>i</i>-umlaut but actually did not. Such words have undergone what is known as ‘spontaneous fronting’. Here are a number of Western Dutch examples, together with reconstructions and cognates in English and Eastern Dutch.

**Table: <i>Spontaneous fronting in Dutch</i>**

| original vowel | reconstructed example | medieval Western Dutch | modern Western Dutch | English cognate | Eastern Dutch cognate |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>*a</i> | <i>*stappaz</i> | <i>*step</i> | <i>step</i> [stɛp] | <i>step</i> | <i>stap</i> [stɑp] |
| <i>*u</i> | <i>*fullaz</i> | <i>*fyll</i>[^en4_14] | <i>vul</i> [və̈l] | <i>full</i> | <i>vol</i> [vɔl] |
|  | <i>*suguz</i> | <i>*sygu</i> | <i>zeug</i> [zøx] | <i>sow</i> | <i>zoog</i> [zox] |
| <i>*ū</i> | <i>*hūsan</i> | <i>*hȳs</i> | <i>huus</i> [hys] | house | <i>hoes</i> [hus] |
| <i>*ō</i> | <i>*brōθēr</i> | <i>*brø̄der</i> | <i>bruur</i> [bryr] <i>breur</i> [brør] | <i>brother</i> | <i>broer</i> [brur] |
| <i>*au</i> | <i>*augōn</i> | <i>*ø̄ga</i> | <i>uug</i> [ȳ(ə)x] | <i>eye</i> | <i>oog</i> [ox] |

As the reconstructions in the second column show, there was neither an *<i>i</i> nor a *<i>j</i> in the second syllable of these words that could have caused <i>i</i>-umlaut. Yet in Western Dutch all words developed as if there was: short *<i>a</i> became *<i>e</i>, and the rounded vowels and diphthong all become rounded front vowels, exactly as they would if they had undergone <i>i</i>-umlaut. This is what is called spontaneous fronting: a mid or rounded back vowel becomes a front vowel without apparent cause.

What the diagram does not show is one of the well-known banes of Dutch dialectologists: these spontaneous frontings have a widely different distribution across the dialect map and across the lexicon.

(1) *<i>a > e</i> occurs in isolated words in Middle and Modern Dutch dialects.[^en4_15] Examples comprise <i>step</i> ‘step’, <i>dek</i> ‘roof’, <i>strek</i> ‘tight’, <i>tem</i> ‘tame’, <i>tek</i> ‘branch’, and <i>bled</i> ‘leaf’, all of which have <i>-a-</i> in standard Dutch. In each word, the distribution of forms with <i>-e-</i> and <i>-a-</i> is different, but the preponderance of <i>-e-</i> along the coast and up the rivers is clear. Since Frisian (and <a id="p132"></a>English) underwent a similar development, this may be a feature of Coastal Dutch that managed to be transferred to Western Dutch. Recall that its long counterpart *<i>ā</i> shared a similar fate: it was fronted to *<i>ǣ</i> in Coastal Dutch (whence it could enter Western Dutch), Frisian, and English.

(2) *<i>ō</i> was retained as a closed *<i>ō</i> along the coast and in the extreme east. Medieval Flanders (that is to say in the south of the Western Dutch area, which is well represented in medieval literary sources) appears to belong to this area but shows special developments: *<i>ō</i> became <i>ou</i> before labial and velar consonant (e.g. <i>roupen</i> ‘call’ < *<i>hrōp-</i>, <i>bouk</i> ‘book’ < *<i>bōk-</i>) and <i>ō</i> on its way to <i>ū</i>, spelled <oe>, before a dental (e.g. <i>groen</i> ‘green’ < *<i>grōn-</i>, <i>voet</i> ‘foot’ < *<i>fōt-</i>). In a wide band between this western area and the extreme east of the Dutch-speaking area, however, *<i>ō</i> became <i>uo</i> and then <i>ū</i>, which in Middle and Modern Dutch was spelled as a rule as <oe>.

In this landscape, with closed *<i>ō</i> in the west and the extreme east, and *<i>uo</i> in the centre, spontaneous fronting occurred incidentally in a small number of words, as a result of which *<i>ō</i> became *<i>ø̄</i>, and *<i>uo</i> became *<i>yø</i> and thence *<i>ȳ</i>. Because this fronting has not received as much coverage in the secondary literature on Dutch as the other frontings, a detailed treatment is in order (disheartened readers may wish to continue at (3) below). In Middle Dutch, the only unambiguous spellings of this front vowel are <ue> and <u>, but they are unambiguous only in the west.[^en4_16] Berteloot (1984) provides a number of maps on the distribution of such <ue> spellings across Middle Dutch scriptoria in the thirteenth century. His map 111, *<i>mōdēr</i> ‘mother’, shows <mueder> only in Brussels.[^en4_17] Map 112, *<i>brōθēr</i> ‘brother’, on the other hand, has <ue> and <u> spellings in the southwest of Belgian Brabant and in Dutch Brabant as well as in Houten (Utrecht) and Wateringen (South Holland). This strongly resembles the pattern on map 114 of the spellings <gued, gud> of *<i>gōdaz</i> ‘good’. The fronting of these two words is confirmed by modern dialect data. Modern Dutch <i>bryr</i> ‘brother’ is widespread in Belgian Brabant and Belgian Limburg as well as in Dutch North Brabant and the river area of Gelderland.[^en4_18] Fronted /γyt/ ‘good’ and the like are attested in Belgian Brabant.[^en4_19] The word for ‘mother’ is generally <i>moeder</i> [mudər] or the like, so without fronting, but the affectionately shortened form *<i>mōd- ></i> *<i>mōj-</i> comes out as fronted <i>møj</i> in Zeeland, Utrecht, and western Gelderland (standard Dutch has <i>moei</i> /mui/, so lacks fronting).[^en4_20] The verb <i>duun</i> [dyn] ‘to do’ is widespread in the Gelderland river area (Betuwe), to which other dialects and the standard language correspond with unfronted <i>doen</i> [dun]. Place-name evidence marks incidental dots in the original area of distribution of fronting: <i>Vleuten</i> < *<i>flōt-</i> ‘flood’ and <i>Breukelen</i> < *<i>brōk-</i> ‘periodically inundated land, marsh’ (standard Dutch <i>broek</i> [bruk], cognate with English <i>brook</i>) just west of the town of Utrecht, <i>Bruchem</i> < *<i>Brōkahaima-</i> in westernmost Gelderland, and <i>Brussel</i>, the town of Brussels, < *<i>Brōka-sal-</i> all show spontaneous fronting. The Middle Dutch spelling <i>bruek</i> of the common noun <i>broek</i> ‘swamp’ probably does, too.[^en4_21] Most instances of <a id="p133"></a>spontaneous fronting of *<i>ō</i> have been lost in the modern dialects. A precious instance is the word for Wednesday, Proto-Germanic *<i>Wōdanasa dagaz</i>, literally, ‘Woden’s day’. This is <i>woensdag</i> [wunsdax] in Modern Dutch, so without fronting. But the data of a dialect study undertaken in 1879 reveal widespread <i>weun(e)sdag</i> [wøn(ə)sdax] in Frisian towns, North and South Holland, and Zeeland, as well as the archaic form <i>wuunsdag</i> [wynsdax] in the towns of Den Bosch and Tilburg in Dutch North Brabant. By the middle of the twentieth century, these forms had all but disappeared.[^en4_22]

(3) *<i>au</i> normally became <i>ō</i> in Dutch, which turns up in southern Modern Dutch dialects as a diphthong <i>oə</i> or <i>uə</i>. In East Flanders and Southwest Brabant around Brussels, modern dialects show spontaneous fronting to <i>y</i> or <i>yə</i>.[^en4_23] Examples are [byəm] ‘tree’ < *<i>bauma-</i> (English <i>beam</i>, Dutch <i>boom</i>) and [bryət] ‘bread’ < *<i>brauda-</i> (Dutch <i>brood</i>). There is no indication how old the diphthongization to <i>oə</i>, <i>uə</i> is,[^en4_24] nor when fronting to <i>y(ə)</i> occurred. Middle Dutch spellings with <ue> or <u>, which would indicate approximately [y(ə)], appear to be lacking, and this might point to the conclusion that fronting had not yet occurred or that dialects that had [y(ə)] happen not to be represented in the written language of the time. There are indications that Flanders showed a particularly close pronunciation of *<i>au > ō</i>, which verged upon [ū]: the place names <i>Roeselaar</i> (near Aalst, East Flanders) and <i>Roeselare</i> (central West Flanders) contain the old word for ‘reed’, *<i>raus-</i>, which had become *<i>rōs-</i> as elsewhere and then was closed to *<i>rūs-</i>, spelled <roes>.[^en4_25] It is this <i>ū</i> that was fronted to <i>y(ə).</i>

(4) *<i>u</i> > *<i>y</i> is one of the most enigmatic developments in the history of Dutch, for each affected word seems to have its own distribution across the map. Again a preponderance along the coast is overwhelmingly clear, but in some words *<i>y</i> also occurs in the northeast of the Netherlands and neighbouring parts of Germany (<i>zeun</i> < *<i>syn <</i> *<i>sunuz</i> ‘son’, standard Dutch <i>zoon</i>, German <i>Sohn</i>; <i>veugel</i> < *<i>fygl <</i> *<i>fuglaz</i> ‘bird’, standard Dutch <i>vogel</i>, German <i>Vogel</i>), and in other words in Belgian Brabant (<i>weunen</i>, <i>wunen</i> ‘to live, inhabit’ < *<i>wyn- <</i> *<i>wun-</i>, standard Dutch <i>wonen</i>, German <i>wohnen</i>).[^en4_26]

An important aspect of the problem is the input of the rule *<i>u > y.</i> Proto-Germanic had only *<i>u</i>, not *<i>o.</i> In West Germanic, *<i>u</i> became *<i>o</i> as a result of so-called <i>a</i>-umlaut: *<i>fuglaz</i> became *<i>foglaz</i> because of *<i>a</i> (or *<i>ō</i>) in the second syllable, while *<i>sunuz</i> retained its *<i>u</i>. But the <i>a</i>-umlaut rule was blocked in English, Frisian, and Coastal Dutch if *<i>u</i> was flanked by a labial sound (<i>f</i>, *<i>b</i>, *<i>m</i>, *<i>p</i>, *<i>w</i>) or by a nasal (*<i>n</i>, *<i>m</i>).[^en4_27] So in Coastal Dutch *<i>fuglaz</i> retained its *<i>u</i>, and so did *<i>wullō</i> ‘wool’; both underwent fronting: *<i>fygl</i>, *<i>wylla</i>, whence Dutch (dialectal) <i>veugel</i>, <i>wul</i>. Eastern Dutch had *<i>fogl</i>, *<i>wolla</i>, which could not undergo fronting because they had *<i>o</i> rather than *<i>u</i> and therefore the incorrect input for the fronting rule (just like Old High German <i>fogal</i>, <i>wolla</i>). Retained <i>u-</i> forms of the type *<i>fugl</i> also existed in Old Saxon, which may explain why the input for the fronting of *<i>u</i> to <a id="p134"></a>*<i>y</i> also existed in the northeast of the Netherlands (Old Saxon <i>fugl</i> ‘bird’, northeastern Modern Dutch <i>veugel</i>).

Later on in the history of Dutch, any remaining short *<i>u</i> was opened towards *<i>o</i> (as in *<i>sunuz</i> ‘son’ > *<i>sone</i> > Modern Dutch <i>zoon</i> [zōn] and *<i>sumraz</i> > *<i>somr</i> > Modern Dutch <i>zomer</i> [zōmər]). Again, Eastern Dutch developed in concert with German: Old High German <i>sunu</i>, <i>sumar</i> became Modern German <i>Sohn</i>, <i>Sommer.</i> This opening of *<i>u</i> to *<i>o</i> reduced the number of potential candidates for fronting to zero. So it is possible that the spontaneous fronting of *<i>u</i> to *<i>y</i> occurred wherever the input *<i>u</i> was preserved long enough for the rule to affect it: most in the west and possibly northeast, least in the east of the Dutch-speaking area.

This analysis of the data and the fact that fronting of *<i>u</i> is so widespread outside the extreme west undermine the idea that spontaneous fronting of *<i>u</i> is a Coastal Dutch development, as has sometimes been maintained.[^en4_28] Another counterargument to that idea is that English and Frisian do not show fronting of *<i>u</i>.[^en4_29]

A different consideration might speak in favour of a connection with Coastal Dutch, however: as we saw earlier, the *<i>u</i> that became *<i>y</i> as a result of <i>i</i>-umlaut in Coastal Dutch was unrounded to <i>e</i> or <i>i</i> (remember the example *<i>brugjō ></i> *<i>brygjō ></i> *<i>brygg > brig</i>, <i>breg</i> ‘bridge’). There are two ways of connecting this Coastal Dutch unrounding to the spontaneous fronting of *<i>u</i> to *<i>y</i>. Either the *<i>u</i> becoming *<i>y</i> by spontaneous fronting pushed the other *<i>y</i> (the result of <i>i</i>-umlaut) away lest they merge (a so-called push chain),[^en4_30] or the *<i>y</i> produced through <i>i</i>-umlaut had moved out of the way towards <i>e</i> or <i>i</i>, thus creating space in the vowel system for *<i>u</i> to spontaneously front to *<i>y</i> (a so-called pull chain):

| i | ← | y | ← | u |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| e | ← |  |  |  |

The problem with this account is that it is just a possibility to be believed or disbelieved. Frisian and English underwent unrounding of the *<i>y</i> that arose by <i>i</i>-umlaut to <i>i</i> or <i>e</i> but had no spontaneous fronting of *<i>u</i>, so the impression that both developments are somehow naturally linked is incorrect. Hence the development *<i>u ></i> *<i>y</i> probably has no relation to Coastal Dutch.

(5) The idea that the spontaneous fronting of *<i>u</i> to *<i>y</i> should not be connected with Coastal Dutch is strengthened by the fact that its counterpart, the spontaneous fronting of long *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i>, quite clearly is not native to Coastal Dutch. Although nowadays the west coast has fronting, a number of common nouns and western place names preserve old *<i>ū</i>, which nowadays is [u], spelled <oe>. Examples comprise Scheveningen (South Holland) dialect form <i>zoer</i> [zur] < *<i>sūra-</i> ‘sour’ and the Zeeland place names <i>Soeburg</i> < *<i>Sūθ-burg-</i> ‘south town’ and <i>Armoederhoek</i> < *<i>-mūθ-</i> ‘mouth (also of a river)’.[^en4_31] <a id="p135"></a>Fronting of *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i> characterizes the standard language, where it developed into a modern diphthong [ʌə̈]. Fronting was originally at home in the west and centre of the Dutch-speaking area, and it stretches further east along the rivers, reaching northwards along the Guelder IJssel. Only the extreme northeast and southeast preserve unfronted *<i>ū</i>.

In Belgium, the line that separates western fronted *<i>ȳ</i> from eastern unfronted *<i>ū</i> is continued across the linguistic boundary with French, where it separates West Walloon <i>y</i> from East Walloon <i>u</i> (as in the verb ‘to kill’, western <i>tuer</i> [tye], eastern <i>touer</i> [tue]). This significant fact has given rise to the idea that the fronting of *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i> in Dutch and French are causally linked. The usual interpretation is that fronting was caused by contact with French.[^en4_32] However that may be, the fact that the *<i>ȳ</i> / *<i>ū</i> line is not deflected by the linguistic boundary between Dutch and French points to it being something old, just like the line separating word-final *<i>-k</i> from *<i>-x</i> / *<i>-ʃ</i> that was discussed earlier, which happens to run only thirty kilometres to the west (III.4.1). We have argued that the *<i>-k</i> / *<i>-x</i> line probably originated in Old French and that its continuation in Dutch and German reflects an early medieval francophone population that subsequently switched to Germanic whilst holding on to their native pronunciation of word-final *<i>-k</i> in the west and *<i>-x</i> in the east. The continuation of the * <i>ȳ</i> / *<i>ū</i> line in Dutch probably has the same background. This will be one of the cornerstones in the main argumentation of this chapter, to which we will return in section IV.12.

## 6. COASTAL DUTCH, WESTERN DUTCH, CENTRAL DUTCH, AND EASTERN DUTCH

Before attempting an explanation of the complex linguistic situation of Western Dutch, it is useful to take stock of the relevant data that were discussed earlier.

Along the Dutch and Flemish coast, <b>Coastal Dutch</b> was spoken, which to all intents and purposes is an early form of Frisian. Coastal Dutch had full-flung <i>i</i>-umlaut, which gave rise to the rounded front vowels *<i>y</i>, *<i>ȳ</i>, and *<i>ø̄</i> (from *<i>u</i>, *<i>ū</i>, and *<i>ō</i>, respectively). These lost rounding and became <i>i</i> / <i>e</i>, <i>ī</i>, and <i>ē</i>, respectively, probably well before AD 1000. Coastal Dutch disappeared. Vestiges survive in Western Dutch, which replaced it.

<b>Western Dutch</b> is found between the coastal strip and the westernmost boundary of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut. Western Dutch underwent <i>i</i>-umlaut of short *<i>a</i> to *<i>e</i> (primary <i>i</i>-umlaut) but not of *<i>ā</i>, *<i>ō</i>, *<i>ū</i>, and *<i>au</i> (secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut). Whether it underwent <i>i</i>-umlaut of short * <i>u</i> is unclear: the <i>eu</i> [ø] in words like <i>sleutel</i> ‘key’ (German <i>Schlüssel</i> < *<i>slutilaz</i>) may be the result of <i>i</i>-umlaut or of spontaneous fronting, an issue that has continued to unsettle Dutch historical linguists.[^en4_33] The matter may be settled on the basis of Western Dutch words like <i>slotel</i> < *<i>slutilaz</i>, which is confined to local western dialects, and <i>molen</i> ‘mill’ < *<i>mulīn</i> < Latin <i>molīna</i> and <i>koning</i> <a id="p136"></a>‘king’ < *<i>kuningaz</i>, which entered the standard language. If Western Dutch had undergone <i>i</i>-umlaut of *<i>u</i>, these forms, which contain an *<i>i</i> in the second syllable but patently lack the effect of <i>i</i>-umlaut, should not have existed, but they do. The only way we can explain such forms is by supposing that <i>i</i>-umlaut did not affect *<i>u</i> in Western Dutch and that fronting in words like <i>brug</i> [brə̈γ] < *<i>brygg</i> < *<i>brugjō</i> was caused by spontaneous fronting (which did affect Western Dutch) rather than <i>i</i>-umlaut. As fronting was an erratic process, some words show it (e.g. <i>brug</i>), and others do not (e.g. <i>molen</i>, <i>koning</i>), and again others show it in some dialects but not in others (e.g. fronted <i>vul</i> as opposed to unfronted <i>vol</i> ‘full’ < *<i>fullaz</i>). So Western Dutch developed rounded front vowels, but it did so as a result of spontaneous fronting rather than <i>i</i>-umlaut.

To the east of Western Dutch, in a wide band in the centre of the Netherlands and Belgium, lie dialects that were within reach of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut (which connects them to Eastern Dutch) but also underwent spontaneous fronting to varying degrees (which connects them to Western Dutch). This intermediate zone will be called <b>Central Dutch</b>.

Because of their complexity it is useful to summarize the data concerning spontaneous fronting in Western and Central Dutch.

- Spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i> was originally widespread except along the coast (remnants of Coastal Dutch) and in Eastern Dutch. It is found in Western and Central Dutch. It links up with a similar development in Walloon French and was ultimately so successful that it made its way into the modern standard language.
- Spontaneous fronting of *<i>ō</i> to *<i>ø̄</i> (west) or *<i>yø</i> (east) was originally widespread in the Western Dutch of Holland and Zeeland (but not in Flanders) and in Central Dutch, it seems. For reasons as yet unknown, it was not as successful in the long run, did not make it into the standard language, and survives only as traces in dialects that originally had it.
- Spontaneous fronting of short *<i>u</i> to *<i>y</i> shows an erratic distribution across the map, with a focus in Western Dutch, but it also occurs in Central Dutch, although it seems not to have penetrated as far east as fronting of *<i>ū</i> and *<i>ō.</i> The reason for that may be that the input of the rule, *<i>u</i>, was a much rarer sound in the east than in the west. Examples of fronting did not penetrate the standard language apart from a few exceptions (such as <i>zeug</i> ‘sow’ < *<i>sugō</i>).
- Spontaneous fronting of *<i>au ></i> *<i>ō</i> to <i>y(ə)</i> is limited to East Flanders and adjacent Southwest Brabant and never made an advance on the medieval or modern written language. Its age is unclear.

Finally, <b>Eastern Dutch</b>, which was spoken in the easternmost regions of the Netherlands and Belgium, underwent full-flung <i>i</i>-umlaut and preserved the rounded front vowels (<i>y</i>, <i>ø</i>) which had arisen as a result. It did not <a id="p137"></a>undergo spontaneous fronting. In terms of the development of its vowel system, Eastern Dutch is the same as German. Since they are so aberrant within the Germanic-speaking world, the absence in Western Dutch of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut and the presence of spontaneous fronting in Western and Central Dutch, including its erratic nature, require an explanation.

## 7. WESTERN DUTCH AS AN INTERNALLY MOTIVATED SYSTEM

It has been a well-known fact among historical linguists of Dutch that the absence of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut and the presence of spontaneous fronting define the profile of Western Dutch. One approach to explaining these characteristics is to be satisfied with the bland ascertainment that it simply underwent different sound laws than all other Germanic languages. To the extent that no two related languages ever have the exact same set of sound changes – otherwise they would be one and the same language – this is correct but also trivial and uninformative. Goossens (1980: 198–199) offers a subtler variant of this approach by stating that spontaneous fronting and <i>i</i>-umlaut interfered with each other, and as a result the <i>i</i>-umlaut rule was destroyed. The point can be illustrated by the examples *<i>fullaz</i> ‘full’ and *<i>slutilaz</i> ‘key’. In Eastern Dutch and in Coastal Dutch, according to Goossens, these developed into *<i>full</i> (no <i>i</i>-umlaut) and *<i>slytil</i> (<i>i</i>-umlaut). The vowels in the first syllable became sufficiently distinct in quality that they remained distinct (the distinction was increased in Coastal Dutch by the unrounding of the type *<i>slytil</i> to *<i>slitil</i>, *<i>sletil</i>). In Western Dutch, however, *<i>fullaz</i> developed into something like *<i>f</i>ə̈<i>ll</i> by spontaneous fronting, Goossens proposes. Supposing that *<i>slutilaz</i> originally underwent secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut in Western Dutch as well, it would become *<i>slytil</i>. Now *<i>ə̈</i> and *<i>y</i> were different vowels as well but only subtly so: *<i>ə̈</i> is a rounded central vowel, while *<i>y</i> is a rounded front vowel.[^en4_34] One could therefore imagine that they were insufficiently different from one another and therefore merged: * <i>fyll</i>, *<i>slytil</i>, which later became <i>vul</i>, <i>sleutel</i>. Dialects within Western Dutch that did not have spontaneous fronting (remember that this was an erratic process, for whatever reason) would have had *<i>full</i> (no fronting) as opposed to * <i>slytil</i> (<i>i</i>-umlaut), just like Eastern Dutch. Such dialects might have reacted to dialects that had *<i>fyll</i>, *<i>slytil</i> by reasoning: ‘where you say *<i>fyll</i>, we say *<i>full</i>, so where you say *<i>slytil</i>, we’d better say *<i>slutil</i>.’ Accordingly, the latter is to be considered a hyperdialectism, which served to create a linguistic identity that was different from that of their neighbours, who said *<i>fyll</i> and *<i>slytil</i>. Finally, *<i>full</i> and *<i>slutil</i> developed into modern <i>vol</i>, <i>slotel</i>, respectively. Whatever the details, it was the phonetic proximity of the effects of spontaneous fronting and <i>i</i>-umlaut that obscured the effects of <i>i</i>-umlaut in Western Dutch and ultimately led to its demise.

A weak spot in the argument is that it is very difficult to lift this scenario beyond the status of a purely theoretical possibility: it is possible that this is <a id="p138"></a>what happened, but there is no indication that it actually did. Another weak spot is that the theory does nothing to explain why spontaneous fronting occurred at all. Neither does it account for Central Dutch, which had both secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut and spontaneous fronting, showing that the one does not exclude the other at all. Goossens himself qualifies his proposal as vague and strongly speculative (1980: 199).

## 8. WESTERN DUTCH AS THE PRODUCT OF CONTACT BETWEEN COASTAL DUTCH AND EASTERN DUTCH

A different approach to Western Dutch is based on the reasonable supposition, supported by history, that the Western Dutch area witnessed a confrontation between Frisians, who spoke Coastal Dutch, and Franks, who spoke Eastern Dutch, after about AD 700, when power gradually devolved from the Frisians to the Franks, and that Western Dutch is the product of this confrontation. In a broad sense, this approach has been popular among linguists of Dutch for many decades now (e.g. Heeroma 1951). With respect to <i>i</i>-umlaut, it has been updated and elaborated by Anthony Buccini (1988, 2010).

At first sight it seems rather surprising to attempt to explain the absence of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut in Western Dutch as the consequence of contact between Coastal Dutch and Eastern Dutch, for both of those are characterized by the fact that they did have full-flung <i>i</i>-umlaut. The crucial point, however, is that Coastal Dutch (Frisian) and English had a different chronology of events from Eastern Dutch and German, which entailed that speakers of both dialect groups would have found it difficult to speak one another’s language. By about AD 700 and for a number of centuries after that, secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut in Eastern Dutch and German was still in its initial stages. Proto-Germanic *<i>hrugjaz</i> ‘back’ had become *<i>hruggi</i>, which tended to become *<i>hryggi</i> by <i>i</i>-umlaut. Old High German spells it <i>rucki</i>, as if <i>i</i>-umlaut had not occurred at all. It could do this because secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut was still an automatic rule which stated that any *<i>u</i> followed by *<i>i</i> in the next syllable became * <i>y</i>. Consequently, the fronting of *<i>u</i> to *<i>y</i> in *<i>hruggi</i> automatically ensued because there was an *<i>i</i> in the second syllable. In formal terms this means that the phonological form (i.e. the mental form of the word for speakers at the time) was /hruggi/ and that there was an automatic rule of <i>i</i>-umlaut that operated on this mental form, turning it into the phonetic (pronounced) form [hryggi].

In Coastal Dutch (Frisian) and English, by contrast, secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut had already been completed by the seventh century at the latest, and the *<i>i</i> and *<i>j</i> that caused it had been lost by that time as a result of early simplifications that affected non-initial, unaccented syllables. So when the Frisians came into intensive contact with the Franks after 700, *<i>hrugjaz</i> ‘back, ridge’ had already become Frisian *<i>hrygg</i> (as in Old English <i>hrycg</i>): *<i>u</i> had become <a id="p139"></a>*<i>y</i>, and the *<i>j</i> that was responsible had already been lost. That means that <i>i</i>-umlaut was no longer a rule that speakers could automatically apply given the appropriate phonetic context. In other words, <i>i</i>-umlaut had been phonemicized, and */hrygg/ was the phonological (mental) form of the word, which was pronounced as *[hrygg]. Probably in the course of the eighth century, */hrygg/ was unrounded to */hrigg/ or */hregg/, depending on the dialect within the Coastal Dutch area.[^en4_35]

So by the eighth to tenth centuries, the word for ‘back’ would be approximately * /hrigg/ or */hregg/, pronounced *[hrigg] or *[hregg], in Coastal Dutch (Frisian), but it would be * /hruggi/, pronounced [hryggi], in Eastern Dutch (Franconian). Coastal Dutch had phonemicized <i>i</i>-umlaut, so that the underlying rule had become obscure to its speakers, while Eastern Dutch still preserved the phonetic rule of <i>i</i>-umlaut, which automatically turned the phoneme /u/ into the sound [y] because of the /i/ in the second syllable. In order to bring out the differences between Coastal Dutch and Eastern Dutch on a wider front, a larger list of reconstructions is useful which also incorporates other changes typical of the two dialects at the time.

**Table: <i>Coastal Dutch and Eastern Dutch</i>**

| original vowel | <i>i</i>-umlaut? | original form before <i>i</i>-umlaut | Eastern Dutch (eighth–tenth centuries) | Coastal Dutch (eighth–tenth centuries) | English cognate or meaning |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>*a</i> | yes | <i>*mari</i> | /meri/ | /mere/ | <i>mere</i> |
|  | no | <i>*dagaz</i> | /dag/ | /dæg/ | <i>day</i> |
| <i>*u</i> | yes | <i>*hruggjaz</i> | /hruggi/ [hryggi] | /hrigg/ | <i>ridge</i> |
|  | no | <i>*wulfaz</i> | /wolf/ | /wulf/ | <i>wolf</i> |
| <i>*ā</i> | yes | <i>*skāri-</i> | /skāri/ [skǣri] | /skēr/ | <i>shears</i> |
|  | no | <i>*slāpan</i> | /slāpan/ | /slǣpan/ | <i>to sleep</i> |
| <i>*ō</i> | yes | <i>*fōtiz</i> | /fuoti/ [fyøti] | /fēt/ | <i>feet</i> |
|  | no | <i>*fōtz</i> | /fuot/ | /fōt/ | <i>foot</i> |
| <i>*ū</i> | yes | <i>*hūdjan</i> | /hūdjan/ [hȳdjan] | /hīdan/ | <i>to hide</i> |
|  | no | <i>*hūsan</i> | /hūs/ | /hūs/ | <i>house</i> |
| <i>*ai</i> | yes | <i>*haiθī</i> | /heiθi/ | /hēθe/ | <i>heath</i> |
|  | no | <i>*haimaz</i> | /hēm/ | /hām/ | <i>home</i> |
| <i>*au</i> | yes | <i>*raukjan</i> | /rōkjan/ [rø̄kjan] | /rēkan/ | (to smoke, e.g. fish) |
|  | no | <i>*hlaupan</i> | /hlōpan/ | /hlāpan/ | <i>to leap</i> |

It can be observed that the consonants in both dialects are identical but the vowels are different in almost all forms. Most important, as we saw, Eastern Dutch still possessed a productive, automatic rule of <i>i</i>-umlaut that dictated <a id="p140"></a>that e.g. /fuoti/ should be pronounced /fyøti/, which was alien to Coastal Dutch. Closely connected with this difference is the fact that Coastal Dutch had changed *<i>i</i> and *<i>j</i> as well as a number of other vowels in unstressed (second) syllables while Eastern Dutch still preserved them.

Buccini’s idea starts from the obvious assumption that speakers of Western Dutch who wanted to speak Eastern Dutch, which was becoming the dominant language, were confronted with those differences and had to find a way to deal with them. He suggests that the Eastern Dutch rule of <i>i</i>-umlaut, like any abstract phonological rule, was difficult to acquire for speakers whose first language was Coastal Dutch, and that Coastal Dutch speakers had difficulty acquiring the difference between *<i>i</i> and *<i>e</i> in unstressed syllables because this had been lost in Coastal Dutch in favour of *<i>e</i>. This confused state then led to much variation and simplification in the variety of Eastern Dutch spoken by people whose mother tongue was Coastal Dutch. Thus, failure to grasp the <i>i</i>-umlaut rule behind Eastern Dutch singular *[fuot] – plural *[fyøti] ‘foot – feet’ and difficulty in pronouncing unstressed final [i] in the plural of that word would have led Coastal Dutch learners of Eastern Dutch to simplify this pair to something like either *[fuot] – *[fuote] or *[fyøt] – *[fyøte] ‘foot – feet’, where [uo] and [yø] could end up in the wrong place – wrong, that is, from the perspective of a speaker of Eastern Dutch. Usually, it was the non-umlauted variant ([fuot] in the example) that ultimately prevailed because that was closer to one of the native Coastal Dutch forms (viz. the singular [fōt]) and because [fyøt], with its unfamiliar rounded front vowels, was alien to Coastal Dutch.

One would think that Coastal Dutch speakers might have wanted to avoid the rounded front vowels of the type [y, ø] in Eastern Dutch altogether because those were alien to Coastal Dutch and therefore difficult for them to pronounce. This would help explain why Eastern Dutch forms like /fuoljan/, which was pronounced [fyøljan], reverted to [fuol]- (or [fōl]-) in the mouths of speakers of Coastal Dutch, the effect being absence of <i>i</i>-umlaut in such forms. Yet what we find is more complicated than this, for Western Dutch is full of rounded front vowels: after all, it underwent spontaneous fronting. So how did Coastal Dutch speakers who wanted to speak Eastern Dutch acquire the rounded front vowels that were so alien to Coastal Dutch? In order to get a handle on this issue one might suggest that Coastal Dutch speakers considered rounded front vowels as flags of Frankishness and in a bid to identify with the dominant Franconian-speaking population exaggerated their use of them. This mechanism explains spontaneous fronting as a hyper-Franconianism used by people who wanted to assimilate to Frankish society but got this aspect slightly wrong.

The great advantage of Buccini’s ideas is that they have the potential to create enough linguistic chaos to explain the situation that is attested in Western Dutch: unfamiliarity amongst speakers of Coastal Dutch with the living <i>i</i>-umlaut rule and with the rounded front vowels of Eastern Dutch gave rise to varieties without <i>i</i>-umlaut and without rounded front vowels, <a id="p141"></a>while the imperfect acquisition of where and when rounded front vowels should occur in Eastern Dutch gave rise to varieties with spontaneous fronting. Add a couple of centuries of dialect mixture to confuse the dialectal map even further and out pops Western Dutch.

A disadvantage is that the scenario is fairly coarse. It does not explain why spontaneous fronting of *<i>ō</i>, as in *<i>brōθēr</i> > Middle Dutch <i>brueder</i> ‘brother’, is found both west and east of the umlaut boundaries, with a particular focus on Brabant, while spontaneous fronting of short *<i>u</i>, as in *<i>sunuz > zeun</i> ‘son’, has its epicentre in the west. Nor does it account for the fact that spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i> prevailed both east and west of the umlaut boundaries, while that of *<i>ō</i> was gradually eliminated, even in cases where Eastern Dutch supported the rounded front vowel, as in *<i>fōljan</i> > *<i>fyøljan</i> ‘to feel’ (Eastern Dutch <i>vulen</i> [y], <i>veulen</i> [ø], Western Dutch <i>voelen</i> [u]).

Weighing the pros and cons of Buccini’s proposal is not so much a matter of trying to decide whether it is right or wrong on its own merits but rather one of considering whether an alternative proposal can be suggested that shares its advantages but not its disadvantages and that offers a more exact explanation of the extraordinary features of Western Dutch. Such a proposal is indeed at hand.[^en4_36] It involves the presence of a contact language that has hitherto remained in the shadows: medieval spoken Latin of the Old French type.

## 9. SPOKEN LATIN IN THE LOW COUNTRIES

On the basis of tribal and personal names, it is possible to determine that when Caesar conquered Gaul between 58 and 51 BC and subjugated the tribes that were living in present-day Belgium and the Netherlands, he met with speakers of Germanic and Celtic. It is often difficult to decide whether individual names are Celtic or Germanic, but by and large the evidence suggests that in Belgium and the southern part of the Netherlands up to the estuary of the Rhine and the Maas predominantly Celtic was spoken, while further north it was mainly Germanic. During the following half century, tribes which originated in present-day Hessen (Germany) moved into the area of the Lower Rhine and Maas, which was already inhabited by the Menapii in the west (Flanders, Zeeland) and the Eburones to their east (North Brabant, Limburg, and the Guelder river area in the Netherlands and the adjacent Belgian provinces of Antwerp and Limburg). In this linguistically mixed Germanic and Celtic area, the tribe of the Batavi played a prominent role as defenders of Roman power and as a recruiting ground for Roman soldiers.[^en4_37] The Batavians continued to do so for the best part of three centuries, until they became submerged in the wars and political chaos of the second half of the third century.

The boundaries of the Roman Empire stabilized in the form of the fortresses of the <i>limes</i> on the Lower Rhine. The area was heavily militarized, <a id="p142"></a>and therefore Roman influence must have been intense and would have led to widespread Celtic-Latin and Germanic-Latin bilingualism. Important evidence to support this scenario comes from the Batavian lands of Gelderland and North Brabant, a densely settled, predominantly rural zone during the first and second centuries AD. Rural settlements consisted of traditional farmsteads, which showed few outward signs of Romanization. What is special about these settlements is the large amount of so-called seal boxes that have been found in them. Seal boxes are small copper boxes which contained a waxed imprint that was used to seal written documents. Those documents probably were private letters that were exchanged between Batavian soldiers, who served in auxiliary units all over the Empire, and their family and friends at home. It has been calculated that almost every single family had one or two of its members under arms. Their period of service was twenty-five years, and most veterans returned home afterwards, so there was every reason for them to keep in touch with the home front; letters offered the only practical means of doing so, and Latin was the only available medium in which to write them. The finds indicate that a large segment of the local rural population in the Batavian lands was capable of reading and writing Latin, and that this was a skill that people acquired in the army. This degree of linguistic Romanization of everyone directly or indirectly connected with the Roman army must have had profound effects on the everyday spoken language to the extent that people were probably actively bilingual. In the course of the three long centuries between Caesar’s conquest of the Low Countries and the collapse of Roman power in the area around 250, the native language may well have been replaced by Latin.[^en4_38]

What is not clear is whether the spoken Latin of the Batavian area survived the disappearance of Batavian identity during the troubles of the late third century. Derks and Roymans (2002: 103) stress the ‘strong discontinuity in habitation in late-Roman times and the Migration period, combined with the massive influx of new Germanic-speaking groups’, which ‘brought about a clean break in the Latin linguistic heritage in the region, which ultimately prevented it from being transmitted to the Middle Ages’. Those newcomers are associated with the name of the Franks in Roman sources. What is certain is that the Roman <i>limes</i> never recovered. In their stead came fortifications further south, along the Roman road that connected Cologne via Maastricht and Tongeren with Bavai on towards Boulogne-sur-Mer. North of the road, periodic military altercations between Rome and the immigrants lasted throughout the fourth century. Gradually the Franks formed a buffer state that protected the Empire against renewed immigrations and attacks from the north until well into the fifth century. This far north, Roman activity became ever more limited, and the Franconian buffer state gradually took over Roman strongholds. South of the fortified road Roman life resumed and even flourished until the early fifth century. It is significant that the road more or less corresponds to the modern linguistic boundary between Dutch and French.

<a id="p143"></a>During the fifth century, as Roman power waned and Franconian pressure grew, various small kingdoms under Franconian rulers were established in the present-day Netherlands, Belgium, and northern France. This area was inhabited by a mixed Latin- (Romance-) and Germanic-speaking population. Bilingualism must have been widespread. In the south, Romance speakers probably greatly outnumbered Germanic speakers, so that in the course of the medieval and early modern period Germanic gradually disappeared. In the north, Germanic dominated and Romance disappeared. There is a wealth of toponymic evidence that supports the survival of Germanic pockets south of the modern linguistic boundary and Romance pockets north of it.[^en4_39] Interesting outliers that demonstrate that Romance survived well into the medieval period in areas that later on were solidly Dutch can be found in Flanders. Gysseling (1981: 114) draws attention to the name pairs Dutch <i>Temse</i>—French <i>Tamise</i> (southwest of Antwerp) and <i>Drongen— Tronchiennes</i> (west of Gent): the former are the ancient Germanic and the latter the ancient Romance versions of the same names. <i>Walem</i>, near Mechelen (province of Antwerp), goes back to an early medieval Germanic *<i>Walha-haim</i> ‘village of *<i>Walhōs</i>’, that is, of speakers of Romance. The same element is found much further north, in <i>Waalwijk</i> (North Brabant, near the Maas; unless it contains the word <i>waal</i> ‘pool’) and in a ninth-century place name <i>Walahheim</i> somewhere in Frisia (that is, somewhere near the estuary of the Rhine and the Maas), which clearly reflects *<i>Walhahaim</i>.[^en4_40] Such names would make sense only in an environment that was predominantly Germanic-speaking.

Such northern outposts of Romance speech offer no more than tantalizing glimpses of a lost linguistic landscape and raise more questions than they can answer. How many Romance speakers were there so far north, and what percentage of the entire population did they form? Did they descend from Latin-speaking Batavians who survived the collapse of the third century? Or were they the linguistic remnants of the Romanized Franconian buffer state of the fourth and fifth centuries, which saw the prominent Franks Bauto and Arbogast rise to the highest military ranks the Roman Empire had on offer? Or does their origin lie later still, when Romance speakers moved north as part of a reflux during the Merovingian period? Such questions cannot at present be answered. For all that, it is important to stress what we do know: that Romance speakers did indeed live far north of the present linguistic boundary during the early medieval period. This is the narrow basis on which a much stronger linguistic argument can be built.

## 10. NORTHERN OLD FRENCH VOWEL SYSTEMS

The Late Latin of the northwestern Roman Empire that survived and presently forms the northern fringe of the French language bordering on the Dutch-speaking area developed into two major dialects: Picardian in the <a id="p144"></a>west and Walloon in the east. Picardian and Walloon were already different from one another during the early Middle Ages. In order to understand the history of Dutch, it will be necessary to pay attention to the development of the vowel system in those two Old French dialects.

The starting point is the Late Latin (Early Romance) vowel system as it had developed by the fifth century in the Roman west:

| A | <i>i</i> |  | <i>u</i> |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | <i>e</i> |  | <i>o</i> |
|  | <i>ɛ</i> |  | <i>ɔ</i> |
|  |  | <i>a</i> |  |

This system forms the basic system of Romance languages such as Spanish, Catalan-Provençal, Rhaeto-Romance, French, and most varieties of Italian. Vowels could be long or short depending on two factors:

- stress
- the structure of the syllable.

With a few well-defined exceptions, stressed vowels in open syllables (i.e. vowels that were word-final or followed by a single consonant plus a vowel) were long, and all others were short.

Since the difference between long and short vowels was governed by transparent rules, vowel quantity (i.e. length or shortness) was not phonemic. This changed when, on the way to Old French, the quality of the long vowels became more and more different from the quality of short vowels. The basic system that underlies French reflects the initial stage of this change, showing that the long mid vowels (*<i>ē</i>, *<i>ɛ̄</i>, *<i>ō</i>, *<i>ɔ̄</i>) had become diphthongs (*<i>ei</i>, *<i>iɛ</i>, *<i>ou</i>, *<i>uɔ</i>, respectively):

| B | long vowels |  |  | short vowels |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | <i>ī</i> |  | <i>ū</i> |  | <i>ĭ</i> |  | <i>ŭ</i> |
|  | <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> |  | <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> |
|  | <i>iɛ</i> |  | <i>uɔ</i> |  | <i>ɛ̆</i> |  | <i>ɔ̆</i> |
|  |  | <i>ā</i> |  |  |  | <i>ă</i> |  |

At this point, dialectal differences began to materialize which drew the short and the long vowels still further apart. Before the tenth century, when the Old French written record sets in, the vowel system had developed in three different ways in what was to become Picardian and Walloon:

| <a id="p145"></a>C3 |  |  |  |  | C2 |  |  |  |  | C1 |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <b>long vowels in Picardian</b> |  |  |  | <b>long vowels in West Walloon</b> |  |  |  | <b>long vowels in East Walloon</b> |  |  |  |  |
| <i>ī</i> | <i>ȳ</i> |  |  | <i>ī</i> | <i>y ȳ</i> |  |  | <i>ī</i> |  | <i>ū</i> |  |  |
| <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> |  | <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> |  | <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> |  |  |
| <i>ī ɛ</i> | <i>yø</i> |  |  | <i>ī ɛ</i> |  | <i>uɔ</i> |  | <i>iɛ</i> |  | <i>uɔ</i> |  |  |
|  | <i>ā > ɛ̄</i> |  |  |  | <i>ā > ɛ̄</i> |  |  |  | <i>ā > ɛ̄</i> |  |  |  |
| <b>short vowels in Picardian</b> |  |  |  | <b>short vowels in West Walloon</b> |  |  |  | <b>short vowels in East Walloon</b> |  |  |  |  |
| <i>ĭ</i> | <i>y ̆</i> |  |  | <i>ĭ</i> | <i>y̆</i> |  |  | <i>ĭ</i> |  | <i>ŭ</i> |  |  |
| <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> |  | <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> |  | <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> |  |  |
| <i>ɛɛ</i> |  | <i>ɛɛ</i> |  | <i>ɛɛ</i> |  | <i>ɔɔ</i> |  | <i>ɛ̆</i> |  | <i>ɛ̆</i> |  |  |
|  | <i>ă</i> |  |  |  | <i>ă</i> |  |  |  | <i>ă</i> |  |  |  |

The diagrams show that the back vowels *<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i> and the diphthong *<i>uɔ</i> could be fronted to *<i>ȳ</i>, *<i>y̆</i>, *<i>yø</i>, respectively. All three were fronted in Picardian, two in West Walloon, and none in East Walloon. Long *<i>ā</i> was fronted in all dialects of Old French. Examples that illustrate the developments can be found in the following diagram.

**Table: <i>Vowel developments between Latin and Old French</i>**

| Classical Latin | A | B | C1 | C2 | C3 | Old French | meaning |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>rīpa</i> | <i>*rība</i> | <i>*rība</i> | <i>*rīve</i> | <i>*rīve</i> | <i>*rīve</i> | <i>rive</i> | ‘bank’ |
| <i>scrīptum</i> | <i>*skrĭpto</i> | <i>*skrĭttu</i> | <i>*eskrĭt</i> | <i>*eskrĭt</i> | <i>*eskrĭt</i> | <i>escrĭt</i> | ‘written’ |
| <i>nĭvem</i> | <i>*nēve</i> | <i>*neive</i> | <i>*neif</i> | <i>*neif</i> | <i>*neif</i> | <i>neif</i> | ‘snow’ |
| <i>sĭccum</i> | <i>*sĕkko</i> | <i>*sĕkku</i> | <i>*sĕk</i> | <i>*sĕk</i> | <i>*sĕk</i> | <i>sec</i> | ‘dry’ |
| <i>vĕtus</i> | <i>*vɛ̄tos</i> | <i>*viɛtus</i> | <i>*viɛts</i> | <i>*viɛts</i> | <i>*viɛts</i> | <i>viez</i> | ‘old’ |
| <i>sĕptem</i> | <i>*sɛ̆pte</i> | <i>*sɛ̆tte</i> | <i>*sɛ̆t</i> | <i>*sɛ̆t</i> | <i>*sɛ̆t</i> | <i>set</i> | ‘seven’ |
| <i>făba</i> | <i>*fāva</i> | <i>*fāva</i> | <i>*fɛ̄ve</i> | <i>*fɛ̄ve</i> | <i>*fɛ̄ve</i> | <i>feve</i> | ‘bean’ |
| <i>grăssum</i> | <i>*grăsso</i> | <i>*grăssu</i> | <i>*grăs</i> | <i>*grăs</i> | <i>*grăs</i> | <i>gras</i> | ‘fat’ |
| <i>bŏvem</i> | <i>*bɔ̄ve</i> | <i>*buɔve</i> | <i>*buɔf</i> | <i>*buɔf</i> | <i>*byøf</i> | <i>buef</i> | ‘cow’ |
| <i>pŏrta</i> | <i>*pɔ̆rta</i> | <i>*pɔ̆rta</i> | <i>*pɔ̆rte</i> | <i>*pɔ̆rte</i> | <i>*pɔ̆rte</i> | <i>porte</i> | ‘door’ |
| <i>flōrēs</i> | <i>*flōres</i> | <i>*floures</i> | <i>*flours</i> | <i>*flours</i> | <i>*flours</i> | <i>flours</i> | ‘flowers’ |
| <i>multum</i> | <i>*mŏlto</i> | <i>*mŏlto</i> | <i>*mŏlt</i> | <i>*mŏlt</i> | <i>*mŏlt</i> | <i>molt</i> | ‘much’ |
| <i>ūsum</i> | <i>*ūso</i> | <i>*ūso</i> | <i>*ūs</i> | <i>*ȳs</i> | <i>*ȳs</i> | <i>us</i> | ‘use’ |
| <i>nūllum</i> | <i>*nŭllo</i> | <i>*nŭllo</i> | <i>*nŭl</i> | <i>*ny̆l</i> | <i>*ny̆l</i> | <i>nul</i> | ‘none’ |

<a id="p146"></a>All changes with respect to the original system B come under the heading of spontaneous fronting.

## 11. SPONTANEOUS FRONTING IN NORTHERN FRENCH AND IN DUTCH

Close inspection reveals that there is a relationship between the geography of spontaneous fronting of rounded back vowels in Walloon and Picardian and in adjacent Dutch dialects:

- East Walloon did not undergo any spontaneous fronting of rounded vowels; neither did its northern neighbours, the Eastern Dutch dialects of Dutch Limburg, eastern Belgian Limburg and eastern North Brabant.
- West Walloon underwent spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i> and *<i>ŭ</i>; the neighbouring eastern Central Dutch dialects underwent fronting of *<i>ū</i>. They probably did not undergo fronting of short *<i>ŭ</i> because that had been opened to *<i>o</i> before fronting could affect it (see sections IV.5, IV.6). The Walloon boundary between western *<i>ȳ</i> and eastern *<i>ū</i> is continued in Dutch (see section IV.5).
- Picardian underwent spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i>, and *<i>uɔ</i>; so did the neighbouring Central and Western Dutch dialects in a wide band between central Belgium/the Netherlands and the coast: *<i>ū</i> was affected everywhere; *<i>ŭ</i> where it had not become *<i>o</i>, thus more in the west than in the east. The diphthong *<i>uo</i> was affected, too, but the scanty remains of that development render a detailed geographical account impossible. What seems clear, however, is that in the Central Dutch dialects *<i>uo</i> had developed from earlier *<i>ō</i>, so that in this area words like Proto-Germanic *<i>gōdaz</i> ‘good’ > *<i>guod ></i> *<i>gyød</i> > Middle Dutch <i>guet</i> were affected. In the Western Dutch dialect of Flanders, however, *<i>ō</i> appears to have become *<i>ou</i> rather than *<i>uo</i> (see section IV.5 above). Here it was the product of the old diphthong *<i>au</i> that came closest to *<i>uo</i>, and it is this that became *<i>yø</i> > <i>y(ə)</i> in East Flanders (e.g. *<i>baumaz ></i> * <i>boum ></i> *<i>buom ></i> *<i>byøm > by(ə)m</i> ‘tree’).

The correspondences between these neighbouring French and Dutch dialects are so exact that they cannot reasonably be ascribed to chance. What does not fit, however, is the behaviour of long *<i>ā</i>, which became *<i>ɛ̄</i> in all French dialects but not in their Dutch neighbours. It is conceivable that *<i>ā</i> in Dutch had already become *<i>ɔ̄</i>, as in almost all modern dialects <a id="p147"></a>except those of Holland, and that this was so different from French *<i>ɛ̄</i> that they could not be attracted to one another. Apart from this one failed correspondence, the match between early Dutch and French spontaneous fronting is near perfect.

The similarity between early medieval Dutch and French extends beyond the frontings to the entire vowel system, as a perusal of the following diagrams shows.[^en4_41] The effects of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut on Dutch will be considered later, so they are not incorporated here.

<i>Vowel systems in the first millennium (prior to secondary</i> i <i>-umlaut)</i>

(1) Eastern Dutch (Limburg Dutch is taken as a model)

| East Walloon |  |  | Limburg Dutch |  |  | East Walloon |  |  | Limburg Dutch |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Short Vowels |  |  |  |  |  | Long Vowels |  |  |  |  |  |
| <i>ĭ</i> |  | <i>ŭ</i> | <i>ĭ</i> |  |  | <i>ī</i> |  | <i>ū</i> | <i>ī</i> |  | <i>ū</i> |
| <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> | <i>ĕ</i><sup>1</sup> |  | <i>ŏ</i><sup>2</sup> | <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> | <i>ei</i><sup>3</sup> |  | <i>ou</i><sup>3</sup> |
| <i>ɛɛ</i> |  | <i>ɛ</i> | <i>ɛ</i><sup>1</sup> |  | <i>ɛ</i><sup>2</sup> | <i>iɛ</i>/<i>ī</i><sup>6</sup> |  | <i>uɔ</i>/<i>ū</i><sup>6</sup> | <i>ie</i>/<i>ē</i><sup>4</sup> |  | <i>uo</i>/<i>ō</i><sup>4</sup> |
|  | <i>a</i> |  |  | <i>a</i> |  |  | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɛ̄</i> |  |  | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɔ̄</i><sup>5</sup> |  |

Table note: 1 <i>*ĕ</i> is the product of (primary) <i>i</i>-umlaut of <i>*ă</i>, which affected all medieval Germanic languages; it was initially distinct from <i>*ɛ̆</i> < Proto-Germanic <i>*e</i> but later merged with it.
Table note: 2 Closed <i>*ŏ</i> or [ʊ] is the product of Proto-Germanic <i>*ŭ</i>; open <i>*ɔ̆</i> arose from Proto-Germanic<i>*ŭ</i> through <i>a</i>-umlaut and was reinforced by Latin loanwords containing <i>*ŏ</i>.
Table note: 3 Eastern Dutch agrees with the rest of Dutch in showing <i>*ei</i>, <i>*ou</i> as continuations of Proto-Germanic <i>*ai</i> and <i>*au</i>, respectively; later developments to <i>*ei</i>/<i>*ē</i> and to <i>*ou</i>/<i>ō</i> in Limburg are governed by <i>i</i>-umlaut and the nature of the following consonant (as in High German; see e.g. Van Loon 1986: 50).
Table note: 4 <i>*ie</i>/<i>ē</i> is the product of Proto-Germanic closed <i>*ē</i> (so-called <i>ē</i><sub>2</sub>) and of <i>*eo</i> that had developed from <i>*eu</i> as a result of <i>a</i>-umlaut; <i>*uo</i>/<i>ō</i> reflects Proto-Germanic <i>*ō</i>. While Central Dutch dialects go along with German in showing <i>*ie, *uo</i> instead of <i>*ē</i>, <i>*ō</i>, Eastern Dutch either preserved the long vowels or, like Walloon, turned the diphthongs into long vowels.
Table note: 5 <i>*ā</i> developed from Proto-Germanic <i>*ǣ</i> (the latter was preserved in contemporary Coastal Dutch, Frisian, and Old English). This <i>*ā</i> developed into <i>*ɔ̄</i> in most Dutch dialects.
Table note: 6 In Walloon, <i>*iɛ</i> and <i>*uɔ</i> developed into <i>*ī</i>, <i>*ū</i>, which nowadays are /ī, ū/ (Remacle 1948: 47–49, 60, 61, who dates the development to the twelfth century or earlier)

As the diagram bears out, Eastern Dutch, like Walloon, is first and foremost a conservative dialect, at least in the first millennium, which we are dealing with here. Since Eastern Dutch and Walloon changed so little, it is impossible to state that they developed in tandem. But things are different as we move towards the west.

<a id="p148"></a>(2) Eastern Central Dutch

| West Walloon |  |  | eastern Central Dutch |  |  | West Walloon |  |  | eastern Central Dutch |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>ĭ</i> | <i>y̆</i> |  | <i>ĭ</i> | <i>(y̆)</i> <sup>1</sup> |  | <i>ī</i> | <i>ȳ</i> |  | <i>ī</i> | <i>ȳ</i> |  |
| <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> | <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>(ŏ)</i> <sup>1</sup> | <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> | <i>ei</i><sup>2</sup> |  | <i>ou</i><sup>2</sup> |
| <i>ɛ̆</i> |  | <i>ɔ</i> | <i>ɛ̆</i> |  | <i>ɔ̆</i> | <i>iɛ</i>/<i>ī</i> |  | <i>uɔ</i>/<i>ū</i> | <i>ie</i><sup>3</sup> |  | <i>uo</i> <sup>3</sup> |
|  | <i>a</i> |  |  | <i>a</i> |  |  | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɛ̄</i> |  |  | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɔ̄</i> |  |

Table note: 1 Both <i>*y̆</i> and <i>*ŏ</i> go back to Proto-Germanic <i>*ŭ</i>. In the eastern Central Dutch dialects, fronting to <i>y̆</i> is rare, and opening to <i>*ŏ</i> is more common.
Table note: 2 <i>*ei < *ai</i>; <i>*ou < *au</i>; they become <i>ē</i> (but by <i>i</i>-umlaut <i>ei</i>) and <i>ō</i>, respectively, during the later Middle Ages.
Table note: 3 *<i>ie</i> < *<i>ē</i>, *<i>eo</i>; *<i>uo</i> < *<i>ō</i>.

This model is representative of Dutch dialects in which originally only long *<i>ū</i> underwent spontaneous fronting, and just possibly also short *<i>ŭ</i> in as far as it had not become *<i>ŏ</i> (which it usually did in the east). This type of Dutch conforms exactly to the West Walloon vowel system, apart from *<i>ā ></i> *<i>ɛ̄</i> (Walloon), *<i>ɔ̄</i> (Dutch).

(3) Central Dutch

| Picardian |  |  | Central Dutch |  |  | Picardian |  |  | Central Dutch |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| <i>ĭ</i> | <i>y̆</i> |  | <i>ĭ</i> | <i>(y̆)</i><sup>1</sup> |  | <i>ĭ</i> | <i>y ̆</i> |  | <i>ĭ</i> | <i>y ̆</i> |  |
| <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>ŏ</i> | <i>ĕ</i> |  | <i>(ŏ)</i><sup>1</sup> | <i>ei</i> |  | <i>ou</i> | <i>ei</i><sup>2</sup> |  | <i>ŏu</i><sup>2</sup> |
| <i>ɛ̆</i> |  | <i>ɔ</i> | <i>ɛ̆</i> |  | <i>ɔ̆</i> | <i>iɛ</i> | <i>yø</i> | <i>ĭe</i><sup>3</sup> |  | <i>yø</i><sup>3</sup> |  |
|  | <i>a</i> |  |  | <i>a</i> |  |  | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɛ̄</i> |  |  | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɔ̄</i> |  |

Table note: 1 Both <i>*y̆</i> and <i>*ŏ</i> go back to Proto-Germanic <i>*ŭ</i>. In the Central Dutch dialects, fronting to <i>y̆</i> is rare, and opening to <i>*ŏ</i> is more common.
Table note: 2 <i>*ei < *ai</i>; <i>*ou < *au</i>; they become <i>ē</i> (but by <i>i</i>-umlaut <i>ei</i>) and <i>ō</i>, respectively, during the later Middle Ages.
Table note: 3 *<i>ie</i> < *<i>ē</i>, *<i>eo</i>; *<i>yø</i> < *<i>uo</i> < *<i>ō</i>.

The third model represents the Central Dutch dialects of Belgian Brabant, Antwerp, and Dutch central and western Brabant as well as western Gelderland. They show spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i>; rarely of *<i>ŭ</i> to *<i>y̆</i> because *<i>ŭ</i> had usually become *<i>ŏ</i>; and generally of *<i>uo</i> to *<i>yø</i>, although this survives only rarely in the later medieval and modern written record and in the modern dialect, a discrepancy to which we will return in section IV.13. This type of Dutch conforms exactly to the Picardian vowel system, apart from *<i>ā ></i> *<i>ɛ̄</i> (Picardian), *<i>ɔ̄</i> (Dutch).

<a id="p149"></a>(4) Western Dutch: Flemish

| Picardian |  |  | Flemish |  |  | Picardian |  |  | Flemish |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ĭ | y̆ |  | ĭ | (y̆) |  | ī | ȳ |  | ī | ȳ |  |
| ĕ |  | ŏ | ĕ |  | (ŏ) | ei |  | ou | ei |  | ou |
| ɛ̆ |  | ɔ | ɛ̆ |  | ɔ̆ | iɛ | yø |  | ie | yø | <sup></sup> |
|  | a |  |  | a |  | <sup></sup> | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɛ̄</i> | <sup></sup> | <sup></sup> | <i>ā</i> > <i>ɔ̄</i> | <sup></sup> |

The Flemish system is identical to the Central Dutch system, but it has a different origin: Flemish *<i>ou</i> does not derive from *<i>au</i>, as elsewhere, but from *<i>ō</i>; and Flemish *<i>yø <</i> *<i>uo</i> does not derive from *<i>ō</i> but from *<i>au</i> (see section IV.5). In Flemish, the proportion of words that show spontaneous fronting *<i>ŭ</i> to *<i>y̆</i> (rather than opening of *<i>ŭ</i> to *<i>ŏ</i>) increases as one moves further west. The resemblance of the Flemish vowel system of the first millennium to that of Picardian is striking.

## 12. ROMANCE FRONTING AND GERMANIC <i>i</i>-UMLAUT

The observed similarities are such that any attempt to explain the Old Dutch vowel system without reference to its Old French neighbour can be regarded as flawed, because any such attempt is based on the highly unlikely assumption that the similarities are accidental. What, then, can be the explanation for this extraordinary pair dance of French and Dutch?

Spontaneous fronting has a completely different status in French than in Dutch. In Germanic, fronting is normally a consequence of <i>i</i>-umlaut, which does not exist in Romance. Spontaneous fronting is typical of a number of Romance languages, and of none more so than French, while in Germanic it characterizes only a tiny portion of the Dutch–German continuum. So there can be little doubt that if spontaneous fronting in Dutch and French are connected phenomena, it is French rather than Dutch that started it.

If spontaneous fronting in Dutch stems from French, the question is how the transfer took place. There are two main scenarios that might be considered.

1. A group of bilingual speakers somewhere in the early medieval Dutch– French contact zone adapted the phonetics of their form of Old Dutch to Old French because Old French phonetics signalled a desirable socio-economic or socio-political status, which made people want to ‘sound French’. Since in Old French fronting was a property of a particular set of vowels (*<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i>, *<i>uɔ ></i> *<i>ȳ</i>, *<i>y̆</i>, *<i>yø</i> spontaneously), while in Germanic fronting resulted from <i>i</i>-umlaut (any back vowel became a rounded front vowel before *<i>i</i>, *<i>j</i> in the following syllable), sounding <a id="p150"></a>French meant abandoning the Germanic <i>i</i>-umlaut rule in favour of the French spontaneous fronting rule. This type of Gallo-Dutch became so popular that it spread among monolingual speakers of Dutch further north.

Given the right sociolinguistic setting, which rewarded people who sounded French with higher status and greater wealth and influence, scenario I could work with just a small bilingual community to start it off.

Although possible in theory, scenario I is unlikely to be correct in practice for the following reasons.

1. In the early medieval period, the language of prestige in the area was Germanic rather than Romance. Ruling Frankish dynasts made a point of flagging their Germanic identity by religiously sticking to Germanic names, such as <i>Chlodovic</i>, <i>Chlothar</i>, <i>Chilperik</i>, and <i>Childebert</i>. The Franconian <i>Lex Salica</i> leaves no doubts about the importance of Germanic-Franconian traditions to this elite. Under those circumstances, one would expect to see speakers of Romance adopting a Germanic accent rather than the other way around.
2. The prestige inherent in scenario I presupposes that a particular type of Old French was considered elitist or otherwise worth copying, not just any variety of Old French. Translated to a more modern setting, nineteenth-century speakers of Dutch who wished to associate with French culture for reasons of prestige chose Parisian French rather than Picardian, Walloon, or Burgundian French, because choosing any of the latter would not have had the desired sociolinguistic effect – quite the reverse, actually. Although we know next to nothing about the relative prestige of varieties of French during the early Middle Ages, it is a matter of common sense that they cannot all have conveyed the same degree of prestige. And although we may grant that the early medieval world operated on a smaller and less centralized scale than today’s, the spread of Old French fronting in Dutch shows a disturbing absence of any centralization. The only structure we see is one of geography: the transfer of fronting from Old French to Dutch follows a distinct south-to-north pattern in no less than four distinct zones: A uniform Old French model that was copied into Dutch is therefore lacking. The south-to-north isoglosses that separate the four zones <a id="p151"></a>suggest that different centres were active in spreading and adopting Old French fronting in Dutch.
  - East Walloon–Eastern Dutch: no fronting
  - West Walloon–eastern Central Dutch: fronting of *<i>ū</i> (perhaps also *<i>ŭ</i>)
  - Picardian–Central Dutch: fronting of *<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i>, *<i>uo</i>
  - Picardian–Western Dutch (Flemish): fronting of *<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i>, *<i>uo</i>, but Flemish *<i>uo</i> has a different origin from Central Dutch *<i>uo</i>

So it seems that spontaneous fronting in Dutch was probably not a result of the adoption of prestigious Old French phonetics by a Germanic-speaking population. We need a different scenario.

1. A Romance-speaking population that was present in the Low Countries (see section IV.9) shifted to speaking Germanic when, sometime in the early medieval period, Germanic had become the language of the socio-political elite. This population replaced the Germanic rule of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut, which was foreign to Romance, with the Old French rule of spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i>, and *<i>uɔ</i>. Spontaneous fronting accordingly is an Old French substratum feature in Dutch.

Scenario II does not suffer from the disadvantages of scenario I. Language shift favoured Germanic over Romance, which agrees with the elite status of Germanic in the early medieval Franconian regions. The four distinct zones, with isoglosses running from south to north across the linguistic boundary of French and Dutch, suggest an ancient Romance dialect area whose northern part, though overlaid by Germanic, preserved the Romance isoglosses.

The Dutch area of spontaneous fronting formed a barrier to Germanic secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut, which apparently moved in from the east in the later first millennium. Where speakers of East Walloon shifted to Eastern Dutch, no spontaneous fronting occurred, so <i>i</i>-umlaut could apply here in the same way as further east, in German. Where speakers of West Walloon had shifted to eastern Central Dutch, only *<i>ū</i> > *<i>ȳ</i> was affected by spontaneous fronting with certainty. This did interfere with <i>i</i>-umlaut, but only in a limited sense: all vowels could undergo it except *<i>ȳ</i> because this already was a front vowel. The interference was strongest where speakers of Picardian shifted to Central Dutch and Flemish, for there *<i>ū</i>, *<i>ŭ</i>, *<i>uo</i> had already been fronted to *<i>ȳ</i>, *<i>y̆</i>, *<i>yø</i>, so that the only vowels that could be touched by <i>i</i>-umlaut were Dutch short *<i>ŏ</i>, which was very rare; short *<i>ă</i> in as far as this had escaped earlier primary <i>i</i>-umlaut, which was rare as well; and *<i>ou</i> (Central Dutch) or *<i>ō</i> (Flemish). Hence the further west one moves in Dutch, the more spontaneous fronting had occurred, and the more <i>i</i>-umlaut peters out. Not only are words affected by <i>i</i>-umlaut rarer in Central Dutch than in Eastern Dutch, but the morphological status of <i>i</i>-umlaut is very different. It is a well-known fact among dialectologists of Dutch that although Central Dutch did undergo <i>i</i>-umlaut, it did not adopt the morphological role it had in Eastern Dutch. In Eastern Dutch, for instance, <i>i</i>-umlaut was exploited to distinguish singular from plural nouns (German <i>Fuss</i>, plural <i>Füsse</i> ‘foot, feet’) and to distinguish the second and third person singular present of <a id="p152"></a>certain verbs from other persons (German <i>ich fahre</i>, <i>du fährst</i>, <i>sie fährt</i> ‘I drive, you drive, she drives’). This type of morphological <i>i</i>-umlaut is absent in Central Dutch, which suggests a more marginal role of <i>i</i>-umlaut here than in the east.

## 13. LANGUAGE AND HISTORY IN THE LOW COUNTRIES

The linguistic data suggest that the southern half of the Netherlands and the northern half of Belgium, which were linguistically Germanic at least from the later medieval period onwards, had witnessed a language shift from Romance to Germanic, the result being Central and Western Dutch. Spontaneous fronting in Dutch is the smoking gun that points to this shift. Eastern Dutch did not undergo spontaneous fronting, hence cannot be shown to have resulted from a language shift on this count. Nor, by the way, can it be shown not to have undergone a language shift: its southern neighbour, East Walloon, lacked spontaneous fronting, so if Limburg Dutch was the result of a shift, this cannot be argued on the basis of spontaneous fronting. But there are other features, which are attested in almost all of Dutch, including Eastern Dutch, that indeed suggest a Romance substratum.

- The development of word-final *<i>-k</i> to <i>-x</i> in southeastern Dutch is one we met earlier (see III.4.1).
- So is the absence of aspiration of voiceless plosives that formed the beginning of our investigation (see IV.1).
- Dutch is the earliest among the Germanic languages to remodel its system of vowel quantity on Romance.

This requires a brief exposition. Classical Latin distinguished between phonemically long and short vowels. Latin <i>rīpa</i> ‘river bank’ had a long /ī/ and <i>vĭdet</i> ‘sees’ and <i>sĭccus</i> a short /ĭ/, and there was nothing in the phonetic context that predicted that this should be so: length and shortness were inherent qualities of the vowels /ī/ and /ĭ/. In Late Latin, this situation changed along the lines explained in IV.10 above: all vowels in stressed open syllables (i.e. word-finally or before single consonant plus vowel) became long, and all others became short. At the same time, slight phonetic differences in the quality of old long /ī/ and old short /ĭ/ became prominent: long /ī/ was close [i], while short /ĭ/ was a slightly more open [I].[^en4_42] Accordingly, <i>rīpa</i> became Late Latin <i>r</i> [iː] <i>pa</i>, while <i>vĭdet</i> became *<i>v</i> [Iː] <i>det</i> and <i>sĭccus</i> became *<i>s</i>[I]<i>ccus</i>. Similar changes affected all Latin vowels. A large number of languages that came into contact with Latin succumbed to a similar fate: Albanian, Slavic, British Celtic, and also Germanic. The British Celtic case, which involved a language shift, is discussed briefly in <a id="p153"></a>chapter II, section 5.1. All Germanic languages ultimately passed through a similar restructuring of their vowel system, but by far the first language to do so was Dutch: the earliest Middle Dutch sources of the twelfth century show its effects. How much older it is is unclear: it may go undetected in our scanty Old Dutch sources, whose orthography does not mark vowel length. We now have a possible answer to the question why this restructuring of the vowel system hit Dutch much earlier than the other Germanic languages: because the new vowel system was introduced into Dutch by a language shift from Old French to Germanic.

It is possible to be more specific about the time and place of the language shift of Old French to Dutch. As to date, the Dutch shift is evidently later than the language shift that was responsible for introducing the High German consonant shift into German. The latter involved a very early form of Romance which still distinguished the affricates *<i>kx</i><sup>j</sup>, *<i>ts</i> <i>j</i>, *<i>pf</i> <i>j</i> and can be dated approximately to the fifth or sixth century. The Dutch shift involves a type of vowel system that is identical with the Picardian dialect as attested in tenth- and eleventh-century Old French written sources. It may well be that the Picardian vowel system is a few centuries older than that: we have no way of knowing this. A reasonable estimate of the date of the Romance-to-Dutch shift is therefore between the eighth and eleventh century. Although the date range is wide, it strongly suggests that the language shift was connected with the Carolingian power surge of the eighth and ninth centuries that led to the destruction of Frisian overlordship of the estuary of the Rhine and Maas.

The ancient Romance dialect boundaries that separated Picardian from Walloon, and East Walloon from West Walloon, survived the shift to Germanic. This suggests that a relatively stable, sedentary population shifted from Romance to Germanic: the language changed, but the people by and large did not. Whether it was a large or small population is hard to say, but that they were farmers rather than roving soldiers is more than likely.

The fertile soils along the Maas and Rhine in what is nowadays the Dutch province of Gelderland and the excellent transport possibilities which the rivers offered had always attracted farmers. Here the Romanized Batavians lived during the Roman period (see section IV.9), and the area must have regained its importance when the chaos of the late third century was over and the Romans and early Franks alternately held sway during the fourth and fifth centuries. This is a region where Central Dutch developed, from which we can now deduce that Late Latin was spoken here until well into the early medieval period. This assumption is supported by toponymic evidence. Blok (1981: 149–151) pointed out that place names in <i>-heem</i> < *<i>haimaz</i> ‘homestead’ are typical of Franconian settlements dating between the sixth and tenth century. Such names are very frequent in the Low Countries, but they are very scarce in the Gelderland river area. At the same time, this is an area where many prehistoric and <a id="p154"></a>Roman-age names survive, such as <i>Tricht</i> (Latin <i>trajectum</i> ‘ford’), <i>Kesteren</i> (Latin <i>castra</i> ‘army camp’), and <i>Wadenooien</i> (Latin <i>vada</i> ‘fords’; Blok 1981: 144–145). The scarcity of-<i>heem</i> names and the good survival rate of Roman-age place names strongly suggest that the Gelderland river area shows a good deal of settlement continuity between Antiquity and the early Middle Ages, so much so that there was little land left to reclaim by the sixth century. At least a portion of this ancient farming population must have spoken Latin.

From the sixth century onwards, by far the most important settlement in the Dutch river area was the town of Dorestad (see IV.4). Its name fully illustrates the linguistic history of the region. Its most ancient form is a Latinized ablative <i>Dorestate</i> ‘from Dorestad’, which appears on Merovingian coins of the seventh and eighth centuries. It is probably a name of Celtic origin: *<i>dworest-</i> ‘gateway’ (which underlies Old Irish <i>dorus</i>) + the inhabitant suffix <i>-atis</i>, plural *<i>-atīs</i>.[^en4_43] Accordingly, the name of the town Dorestad is derived from a Celtic tribal name *<i>Dworest-atīs</i> ‘people who live at the gateway’, i.e. at the point where the Rhine bifurcates into the Rhine and the Lek, giving access to the lowlands near the coast. It was the location of a Roman fort. Its modern form survives in the name of the nearby town <i>Wijk bij Duurstede</i>, literally ‘settlement near Dorestad’. The form <i>Duurstede</i> shows phonological developments that can be explained only through an unbroken tradition that links Celtic, Late Latin, and Central Dutch. First of all, *<i>Dworestat-</i>, etymologically Celtic, became *<i>Dorestat-</i> while still Celtic. When Celtic was replaced by Latin, the name persisted. In Late Latin, *<i>Dŏrest-</i> became *<i>Dɔ̄rest-</i> by lengthening of the vowel in open syllables (see section IV.9), whence *<i>Duɔrest-</i> and, with spontaneous fronting in the Picardian manner, *<i>Dyørest-</i>. This name was retained when people switched from Old French to Central Dutch. During the later medieval period, *<i>Dyørest-</i> became *<i>Dȳrest- ></i> *<i>Dȳrst-</i>, whence modern <i>Duurstede</i> (with <i>uu</i> representing [y]).

The persistent presence of Latin speakers in the Gelderland river area is remarkable because the area seems to have passed out of direct Roman control already by the middle of the third century. In the following centuries, Roman control was sometimes restored over brief periods of time, but by and large power seems to have devolved to local Franconian dynasts, who formed a buffer between the heartland of the Western Roman Empire around Trier and the barbarian north. Christianity penetrated these parts with difficulty. Under the Franconian king Dagobert I (632–639), a church was built in Utrecht, not far from Dorestad, but it lay in ruins when Willibrord made Utrecht the centre of his missionary activities amongst the Frisians towards the end of the seventh century. It may require an effort of the imagination to connect Latin speech with heathen, culturally completely Germanicized farmers whose ancestors had spent the best part of three centuries outside the direct control of the Roman Empire, but that is <a id="p155"></a>exactly what characterized the inhabitants of the Gelderland river area of the sixth and seventh centuries.

Yet there is some evidence, not unexpected, that the same area also harboured speakers of Germanic at the time. Blok (1974: 36–37) drew attention to two ancient Germanic items of geographical terminology. <i>Swifterbant</i>, literally meaning ‘left or northern shire’, denoted the area where the river IJssel split off from the Rhine, in the east of the river area. Its counterpart <i>Tester-bant</i>, ‘right or southern shire’, was the name of the river area west of Tiel. Both terms are linguistically Germanic, but they are not Frisian or Franconian because they make no political sense from either point of view. The terms do make sense, however, from the point of view of a central area between them, which is exactly the fertile and eminently habitable Gelderland river area. No doubt there was some degree of Germanic-Romance bilingualism amongst the population.

The Germanic that overlay and gradually replaced Old French in the Central and Western Dutch area was to all intents and purposes identical to the Germanic of central and southern Germany, from which it differed in two respects that we can now understand.

- The German rule of secondary <i>i</i>-umlaut was replaced by the Old French rule of spontaneous fronting, as argued before.
- Dutch did not undergo the High German consonant shift but simply replaced the Germanic aspirated plosives [p<sup>h</sup>, t<sup>h</sup>, k<sup>h</sup>] with their unaspirated Romance counterparts [p, t, k].

The High German consonant shift can be understood on the basis of a fifthor sixth-century language shift from Late Latin to Germanic, in the sense that speakers of Late Latin replaced the Germanic voiceless aspirated plosives [p<sup>h</sup>, t<sup>h</sup>, k<sup>h</sup>] with their closest Late Latin counterparts [pf<sup>j</sup>, ts<sup>j</sup>, kx<sup>j</sup>], as argued in chapter III. It stands to reason that Eastern Dutch, like northern German, did not undergo the consonant shift because that dialect did not result from a shift from Late Latin to Germanic. But Central and Western Dutch did, according to the argument of this chapter. The shift of Old French speakers to Dutch probably occurred a few centuries later, when [pf<sup>j</sup>] and [kx<sup>j</sup>] may have no longer been available, but, more important, the sociolinguistic setting was completely different: the Late Latin speakers involved in the fifth- to sixth-century shift did their utmost to approach the Germanic model consonants with the means that Late Latin put at their disposal. This suggests they were driven by a desire to assimilate to the language, culture, and society of the Germanic elite of the time. Our Dutch speakers of Old French who shifted to Germanic, on the other hand, did almost nothing to make themselves sound Germanic. They spoke Germanic with Old French phonetics,[^en4_44] apparently because they acquired Germanic speech not out of a desire to assimilate to Germanic speakers but rather just <a id="p156"></a>to communicate with them. This presupposes a relatively high degree of cultural self-confidence.

By the time the Old French speakers switched to Germanic, the Germanic they acquired was no longer uniform in at least one respect: in Flanders, Proto-Germanic *<i>au</i> had developed into something approaching Old French *<i>uɔ ></i> *<i>yø</i>, while Proto-Germanic *<i>ō</i> had become similar to Old French *<i>ou.</i> In the rest of Central and Western Dutch, the developments were reversed: *<i>au</i> became *<i>ou ></i> *<i>ō</i>, and *<i>ō</i> became *<i>uo > yø</i>. It is possible to hazard the guess that this difference between Flemish and the rest had arisen as a result of the isolation of Flanders during the early medieval period. After Clovis’ death in 511, the vast Franconian kingdom was divided amongst his sons. Flanders fell to the northwestern realm of Neustria, while the Central and Eastern Dutch areas up to the rivers formed part of Austrasia. Even though time and again a powerful king managed to rule both realms, subsequent divisions reinstated the boundary between Neustria and Austrasia.

## 14. TOWARDS MODERN DUTCH

An important issue that remains to be addressed concerns the subsequent history of Dutch after c. 1000, in particular the question why the spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i> was the only fronting that spread and ultimately came to dominate the standard language, whereas the fronting of *<i>ŭ</i>, *<i>uo</i>, and *<i>au</i> remained local and did not enter the standard language except in isolated words, which sealed its fate as a recessive feature. It is important to remember that the land reclamations that had gained momentum by the seventh century greatly accelerated after 1000, particularly in West Flanders, Zeeland, and Holland. This was followed by urbanization, starting in Flanders and later in Holland. Land reclamation and urbanization attracted large numbers of people from outside, which is bound to have given rise to a dialectal melting pot in which Coastal Dutch and the different varieties of Western, Central, and Eastern Dutch came into contact. In such situations, new language varieties may arise which are supradialectal: speakers search for a common ground by reducing dialectal peculiarities that impair mutual comprehensibility and by highlighting existing commonalities and creating new ones. Such a hyperdialect is often termed a <i>koine</i>, after the Greek supradialectal variety that arose in the fourth century BC. Developments after AD 1000 gave rise to a Dutch <i>koine</i>. Against this background, it is easy to understand why spontaneous fronting of *<i>ū</i> to *<i>ȳ</i> became a feature of the <i>koine</i>: it was native to all dialects of Western and Central Dutch. By the same token, fronting of *<i>uo</i> was not accepted into the <i>koine</i> because it occurred in the Western Dutch of Flanders in different words than in the rest of Western Dutch and in Central Dutch: where East Flemish <a id="p157"></a>said *<i>byøm</i> ‘tree’, the rest said *<i>bōm</i> (< Proto-Germanic *<i>baumaz</i>), and where East Flemish said *<i>brōder</i> ‘brother’, Central Dutch had *<i>bryøder</i> (< Proto-Germanic *<i>brōθēr</i>). The <i>koine</i> usually settled on non-fronting. An even more scattered pattern was found in the case of fronting of short *<i>ŭ</i>: some dialects had fronted *<i>symer</i> ‘summer’, while others had unfronted *<i>somer</i> (< Proto-Germanic *<i>sumraz</i>). In this case the usual procedure was to adopt the unfronted form (standard Dutch <i>zomer</i>) except in a number of instances where fronting was supported by Central Dutch <i>i</i>-umlaut (*<i>slytel</i> ‘key’ by spontaneous fronting in Western Dutch and by <i>i</i>-umlaut in Central and Eastern Dutch, from Proto-Germanic *<i>slutilaz</i>). It was this Dutch <i>koine</i> that encroached upon Coastal Dutch, rapidly in late medieval and early modern urbanized Flanders and Holland but at a much slower pace in rural parts and in Zeeland.
