---
title: "Historical Linguistics: Toward a Twenty-First Century Reintegration"
author: "Don Ringe and Joseph F. Eska"
date: "2013"
source_type: born-digital
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "ringe-2013-historical-linguistics.pdf"
chunk: "Chapter 3: Language change in the speech community"
pages: "45-58"
---


# Chapter 3: Language change in the speech community


<!-- pdf-page: 61; source-page: 45 -->


<b>Change in the context of variation</b>

It is clear that native-learner errors must survive in the speech of individuals until the end of the developmental window for acquisition in order to become language changes; that is the first bottleneck or filter through which they must pass, so to speak. But if they are to “succeed” as linguistic changes, learner errors must then become accepted variants in the system of linguistic variation in the adult speech community; that is the second external constraint on language change (see Weinreich<i> et al.</i> 1968: 99–102). Virtually nothing is known about that process, for the reasons discussed in the preceding chapter; we can only infer that for social reasons operating on the level of individual relationships some idiosyncrasies of speech are not only tolerated but imitated, and that for structural reasons some innovations are inherently more likely than others to succeed. In any case, a change that begins to spread has crossed an important threshold in its development, because it thereby acquires a significant identity in the speech of the community at large.

From that point forward linguistic change occurs in the context of variation unless and until an innovation becomes universal in a speech community, when it is said to have “gone to completion.” During that part of its trajectory one can study the change only by studying the variation in which it participates – a type of study pioneered and still led by William Labov.

<b>Longitudinal patterns of variation</b>

Unfortunately, though all change is at some point variation, not all variation turns out to be long-term change; one of the first things a sociolinguist must do is try to determine whether or not particular observed phenomena are changes in progress. The most important distinction is between variation which is stable in the long run, including variation which is in dynamic equilibrium and variation which undergoes repeated short-term fluctuations in the occurrence of the variants, and variation which is undergoing a long-term statistically significant shift in the distribution of the variants; only the latter is change in progress.


<!-- pdf-page: 62; source-page: 46 -->


A wide variety of sociolinguistic processes can produce stable variation. In clearly stratified societies different social groups may accommodate their speech to each other’s usage when they interact linguistically, so that different linguistic forms present in the speech community may fluctuate in frequency of occurrence over time because of temporary changes in the overall social context, or in the frequency of different specific social contexts; the result is not necessarily longterm change. For instance, though the pronunciation of low vowels has been socially significant in French since at least the sixteenth century, exactly which pronunciations are prestigious has shifted repeatedly: fronting of /a/ seems to have been prestigious in the sixteenth century, stigmatized in the later seventeenth, prestigious again in the nineteenth, and stigmatized in the twentieth (Lennig 1978: 141–4 with references)! Currently the distinction between the vowels of <i>patte</i> /pat/ and<i> pˆate</i> /pɑt/ is being lost by middle-class women and to some extent even by working-class women because the merged pronunciation is perceived as more “refined” (Lennig 1978: 144–6, 150–8). But it would be rash to assume that the merger of the two low vowels in Paris is a change that will go to completion and become irreversible<i> throughout the whole community</i>, given the fluctuations of the past. A similar situation has recently been observed in Charleston, South Carolina. More than a century ago there was a merger or near-merger of the higher tense front vowels before /r/, so that<i> fear</i> and<i> fair</i>, for instance, became homonyms; but by the middle of the twentieth century that merger was in retreat, partly because of an influx of residents from elsewhere, and all but the oldest native Charlestonians now maintain the contrast clearly (Baranowski 2006: 99–

121 with references). It appears that changes of this sort can reverse themselves

if social conditions change – provided that a merger does not establish itself in an overwhelming majority of sub-populations. Aside from the last proviso, we do not yet know in detail under what circumstances such fluctuations lead to irreversible linguistic change.

Another type of variation whose relation to real change is at best problematic is diachronically stable stratification by age, or “age grading,” in which the use of a form is correlated with age simply because the speakers<i> of each generation</i> alter their usage as they grow older. For example, the pronunciation of /ð/ as a stop (“dese,” “dem,” etc., for<i> these</i>,<i> them</i>, etc.) in the vernacular speech of some American cities is increasingly abandoned by speakers as they age, no doubt because that pronunciation is a severely stigmatized stereotype of lower-class speech (Labov 1994: 73 n. 2, based on the data of Labov 1966 and other studies). Finally, stable variables typically correlate with socioeconomic factors and style (formal vs. colloquial, etc.) in patterns that can be fairly complex; see especially Labov 2001: 74–120 for detailed discussion.

Like age-grading, change in progress is characterized by regular differences in the usage frequencies of variants across ages, with younger speakers using innovative forms more often than older speakers. In the vowel rotations currently under way in United States cities of the East and Midwest, for instance, there is a regular negative correlation between the acoustic distance of the vowel from the


<!-- pdf-page: 63; source-page: 47 -->


standard pronunciation (the conservative norm) and the age of the speaker: the younger the speaker, the greater the distance. The fronting of general American English /ɑ/ (as in<i> socks</i>) to [æ] in Chicago, and the other changes that occur there as part of the same pattern of vowel shifting, are regularly found to be most extreme among the youngest speakers at any given time (both in terms of the frequency with which the shifted variants are used and in terms of how far the vowels are shifted from the conservative norm).<i> In addition</i>, the available “realtime” information about the shift – some twenty-three years of observations, from

1968 to 1991 – reveals that the change is progressive over time (see Labov 1994:

185–95). It is the latter finding that proves that the vowel rotations in question are actually changes in progress.

In what follows we will concentrate on verifiable examples of long-term change.

<b>Key questions about the progress of real changes</b>

The most extensively investigated cases of variation in usage frequencies have been phonological. Among the best known are studies of the rotations of vowels (such as Labov<i> et al.</i> 1972 and the numerous other studies cited in Labov 1994), of vowel mergers (most notably Herold 1990), and of various sandhi processes, such as the deletion of word-final /t/ and /d/ in English or the loss of word-final /s/ and nasals in the Spanish and Portuguese of the western hemisphere (see Labov 1994: 556–61 with numerous references). The deletion processes usually affect consonants and tend to be diachronically stable instances of external sandhi, while vowel rotations and mergers most often prove to be true linguistic changes.

Vowel rotations in particular appear to have characteristic linguistic and social profiles. Linguistically, they often begin with the shift of a vowel from one subsystem of vowels into another (for instance, from the system of lax vowels into the system of tense vowels, or vice versa), followed by its progressive movement through the vowel space (a two-dimensional Cartesian space defined by the first and second formants; see Labov, Yaeger, and Steiner 1972: 31–4, Labov 1994: 159–60, 165–6). Vowels belonging to the same subsystem tend to move together, maintaining their distance from one another as they move through the vowel space. These movements are gradual, taking place over periods of two generations and more, with each birth cohort slightly shifting the target positions of the vowels further in the same direction. Because the vowel space is defined by the formant frequencies of the open vocal tract used in vowel pronunciation, vowel rotations are continuous rather than categorical changes; though examples of rotations within which mergers (eventually) occurred are known from the historical record, it appears from studies of rotations in progress that mergers are not a typical result. Socially, rotations seem to arise in the vernacular language


<!-- pdf-page: 64; source-page: 48 -->


among the section of the population with the strongest and most stable ties to the local neighborhood community, but they spread more or less uniformly to all segments of the population of a given geographic region. Why these changes have a consistent direction and proceed to completion in the way that they do is an important question that needs to be answered.

Vowel mergers occur when phonetically similar but distinct vowel phonemes are no longer perceived or pronounced differently, leading to homophony. Unlike rotations, mergers are categorical: either two vowels are distinct or they are not, and once two vowels have merged, the contrast can never be reestablished in the same distribution by processes internal to the merging dialect. (That is true of all mergers, of course, not only of vowel mergers; see Chapter 5 for further discussion, as well as discussion of near-mergers.) Dialectologists have observed that when a geographic area in which two vowels have merged is adjacent to one in which the vowels remain distinct, the area of merger tends to expand at the expense of the area with the distinction. The reasons for that pattern have become clear in recent work; they were discussed in Chapter 2, and we will have occasion to return to this phenomenon below.

Two further aspects of the spread of innovations are central to the process of linguistic change. On the one hand, a new form spreads from its locus of origin to new geographic, social, and stylistic environments, while on the other hand it also increases in frequency within the speech-community environments in which it already exists. These two aspects of diffusion raise significantly different issues. The spread of an innovation to new social or stylistic environments can conveniently be thought of as borrowing (from social group to social group, or from one style into another); but increasing frequency of use within a given speech-community environment is clearly something else. Both processes can be accompanied by spread of the innovation to new<i> structural</i> – i.e. phonological, morphological, or syntactic – environments; we will note that aspect of the spread of change in our discussion below, though for the most part we focus in this chapter on linguistic environments whose definition is external to structure.

<b>Spread of an innovation as borrowing</b>

From the start it has been clear that innovations can be borrowed from one part of the speech community by another. In Labov’s pioneering study of Martha’s Vineyard, the distribution of [əɪ] and [əʊ] (the variants of /ɑɪ/ and /ɑʊ/ with raised nucleus) by age and ethnic group shows clearly that the descendants of Portuguese immigrants have borrowed this change from the longer-standing population of “Yankee” Vineyarders: whereas the speech of second-generation Portuguese-Americans on the island did not show much raising, contrasting sharply in that regard with Yankee speech of the same generation, third- and fourth-generation Portuguese-Americans have adopted the innovation (Labov


<!-- pdf-page: 65; source-page: 49 -->


1963: 295, 301–2). In fact, the borrowers can be said to have overdone it, showing more spread of raising from /ɑɪ/ (its original locus, Labov 1963: 281–2, 293–4) to /ɑʊ/, and more raising overall (p. 302); that is, the borrowing of the change from one speech-community environment into another has been accompanied by its spread from one phonological environment into another, as well as by an increase in the frequency of use of the new form.

Similar socially motivated cases are not hard to find. Penelope Eckert and other linguists have shown that a sharp ideological and social division among Midwestern adolescents typically has large linguistic consequences. The “antiestablishment” students, who will (mostly) not be applying for university admission and are anxious to get out from under adult authority and become adults themselves as soon as possible, tend to adopt and even exaggerate linguistic innovations characteristic of vernacular speech (Eckert 1991, Habick 1991). This can provoke the establishment-oriented students into creating speech norms that exaggerate in the opposite direction – for example, fronting a vowel in the environments in which the antiestablishment crowd backs it (Eckert 1991: 228–30) – though linguistic behavior of this latter sort seems less common.

Borrowing of a change across social (including ethnic) boundaries is of course not the only type of borrowing attested. Borrowing from one geographical area to another has been known and studied for more than a century; examples of the spread of changes across the European countryside in a wavelike fashion, typically outward from cities in which the innovations appear to have originated, can be found in any of the more traditional introductions to linguistics or historical linguistics (cf. e.g. Bloomfield 1933: 328–38, Bynon 1977: 173–83, Hock 1991: 432–41, all with references to earlier classic studies). But geographical borrowing need not take place between geographically contiguous populations (Trudgill 1983: 52–87). For instance, Callary reports a raising of /æ/ in specific phonological environments in the English of Chicago and other urban centers of northern Illinois that is not shared by adjacent rural areas; interestingly, the larger the urban area in which the speaker lives, the more extreme the raising (Callary 1975). So far the best available explanation is that the change has been borrowed from Chicago English by residents of smaller cities as a means of asserting their urban identity, though more work will be needed to establish that definitively (ibid. p. 168).

In general, it seems clear that the innovations characteristic of dominant social groups are borrowed by other groups that desire acceptance by the dominant group; that is especially clear in the Martha’s Vineyard study. But some strong caveats are in order. In the first place, the definition of social dominance can be extremely localized in space and time. No one would argue that the Philadelphia working class was in any sense dominant, relative to the “old money” families of the Main Line, during the period that the older upper-class speakers interviewed by Kroch were growing up and acquiring their definitive patterns of speech; yet the distinctive innovations of Philadelphia working-class speech were clearly borrowed by upper-class speakers. The explanation for this pattern seems to be that, as small children, upper-class Philadelphians of the older generation were


<!-- pdf-page: 66; source-page: 50 -->


typically raised with working-class playmates, and to some extent by workingclass servants, and thus acquired the innovations characteristic of local workingclass speech (Kroch 1996: 26–7). In other words, the patterns of authority and social acceptance characteristic of early childhood were decisive in this particular case, even though they were completely reversed in adulthood! Something similar appears to have happened in Charleston, where the local dialect of the white natives may have been influenced by Gullah, a creole spoken by former slaves who were employed as domestics and nannies by wealthy families (Baranowski 2006: 66–71, 234). Moreover, it is not any objective economic or political dominance that motivates the borrowing, but the<i> perception</i> that one group enjoys socially favored status. That is clear enough from Callary’s study. It seems quite unlikely that residents of the smaller urban areas of northern Illinois are in daily contact with Chicagoans or have any objective need to be accepted by them; nevertheless, they seem to have adopted a striking feature of Chicago speech as a means of asserting that they, too, are urbanites. Presumably that is not only a matter of asserting an identity, but also of rejecting one: residents of Dixon, Illinois, for example, with a population of less than 20,000 at the time of Callary’s study, can reasonably be suspected of saying [beək] for<i> back</i> as a means of proclaiming, “We are not hicks!”

A final, and rather surprising, pattern has emerged from a variety of sociolinguistic studies: many changes are implemented first and most vigorously by women, while men lag behind. To some extent this must mean that innovations are borrowed from the speech of women into that of men. Positing such a development for vowel rotations is something that must be attempted with care, because the apparent “lead” of the women could simply be an artefact of incomplete normalization: because the pitches of men’s and women’s voices, and thus the fundamental frequencies of their speech, are different, the hearer mentally “corrects” the harmonics (formants) of the vowels to bring them into line, and incomplete correction can appear to leave women with relatively higher second formants – thus fronter vowels (Anthony Kroch, p.c.). But not all the changes in which women are ahead are vowel rotations. In modern Cairene Arabic, palatalization of the dental stops before high front vocalics is clearly a relatively new sound change in progress (Haeri 1997: 70–3), and women lead the implementation of the change by a wide margin (ibid. pp. 68–9, 73–83). However, Cairene men – including men who wish to project an overtly masculine image – do use the palatalized variants (ibid. pp. 96–8, 100). In fact, while many interviewees agreed that there were differences between the speech of men and women, not one mentioned the much greater use of palatalized variants by women (ibid. pp. 221–2)! It is even possible to find similar sound changes which are led by men in one dialect and by women in another; for instance, the raising of the nucleus of the diphthong /ɑɪ/ in North American English is led by men in Philadelphia (Labov 2001: 284, 289), but the parallel raising of /ɑʊ/ is led by women in Ann Arbor, Michigan (Dailey-O’Cain 1997: 114–16). Still, though not all changes in progress exhibit the same pattern of gender differentiation and though the differences between


<!-- pdf-page: 67; source-page: 51 -->


male and female speech are not always large, it is fairly typical to find some difference and to find women innovating more. This is all the more surprising because in the case of innovations whose spread has “stalled out” and which have become stigmatized, women seem to play an opposite role, rejecting the stigmatized variants in favor of the conservative norms and so helping to enforce the latter (see Labov 2001: 366–7).

Recent research by Labov and his students and co-workers has begun to make sense of this pattern. Surveying the available evidence, Labov concludes that the leaders of vigorously progressing linguistic changes “are women who have achieved a respected social and economic position in the local networks. As adolescents, they aligned themselves with the social groups and symbols that resisted adult authority . . . without deviating from their upwardly mobile path within the local social structure” (Labov 2001: 409). However,

[t]here is no evidence that attitudes, ideologies, and opinions . . . will bear

directly upon linguistic changes from below . . . These attitudes may influence

who a person talks to and how often they talk, and so affect the flow of

linguistic influence . . . From this point of view, the use of local Philadelphia

speech forms is the product of speakers’ social trajectories, and we can best

explain the leaders’ linguistic performances by the history of their social

contacts in their formative years.

(ibid. pp. 409–10)

In other words, the women who are “out in front” in implementing a linguistic change apparently acquired their relatively extreme innovative pattern of speech as disaffected (but not alienated) teenagers and, upon becoming highly successful adults (by local measures of success), tend to spread that innovative pattern both because of their wide and varied contacts in the local social networks and because of their respected status – their interlocutors tend to want to speak like them. In short, it appears that women are better positioned to be agents of linguistic change because of their greater adeptness at social networking, on the average, and that vigorously independent-minded women are the actual agents of change both because they are likely to have embraced linguistic innovations when young and because they are likely to be influential in their communities as adults. The significance of innovations among young speakers will call for further discussion below.

In the very long term – the point of view taken by most historical linguists – the borrowing of innovations has important consequences. In the borrowing of phonological changes, phonemic units usually remain intact; phonological constraints on an innovation are usually borrowed unaltered, tightened or relaxed in phonologically intelligible ways, or abandoned altogether. For instance, the merger of /ɑ/ and /ɔ/ in North America is not reported to be acquiring exceptions as its spreads; as the raising of the nucleus of /ɑɪ/ on Martha’s Vineyard became more frequent and more extreme, raising spread to the parallel back diphthong /ɑʊ/; and so on. In other words, borrowers of phonological innovations usually do not disrupt the<i> diasystem</i> – the system of equivalences between the discrete phonological units of different dialects within which variation occurs – evidently


<!-- pdf-page: 68; source-page: 52 -->


because the rules required to map the pronunciations of one dialect onto another are easy to learn so long as no new contrast must be learned. That is one reason why sound change, even when broadly defined, is overwhelmingly regular.

But occasionally the borrowing of a sound change is inconsistent, resulting in lexical exceptions (positive or negative). Maps illustrating traditional dialect geography offer numerous examples (see e.g. Bloomfield 1933: 328). An almost certain example in North American English involves the tensing of /æ/. That innovation seems to have begun in New York City in the first half of the nineteenth century, to judge from the fact that it was well advanced in that city by the 1890s (see Babbitt 1896: 461). The conditioning of the tensing in New York is very complex (Labov<i> et al.</i> 1972: 48–50), and the full pattern of conditioning seems to have been present already in the early twentieth century, to judge from the descriptions of Trager 1930, 1940. The pattern that Trager described was that of his own speech (Trager 1930: 399); he was born in 1906 in Newark, New Jersey, to which the New York pattern had apparently spread. (Tensing of inherited /æ/ in some phonological environments is quite widespread in the USA [Trager 1930: 399; Labov<i> et al.</i> 1972: 48], but the phonemic split is more restricted [see Trager 1940: 255; Labov<i> et al.</i> 1972].) Tensing of /æ/ seems to have spread to most of the large cities of the USA’s eastern seaboard, sometimes with its conditioning almost intact; for example, the pattern among the oldest surviving natives of New Orleans closely resembles Trager’s (Labov 2007: 365). However, the spread of tensing was accompanied by changes in its conditioning in some areas, and in New York itself the phonological scope of tensing has not remained static. A very complex pattern of development can be summarized briefly as follows. The basic New York rule tenses /æ/ before anterior nasals, voiced oral stops and affricates, and voiceless fricatives, provided that the conditioning consonant is followed by word-end, a morpheme boundary, or an obstruent and the word is fully stressed (Labov<i> et al.</i> 1972: 48–9; note the examples in Babbitt, 1896). However, words which are acquired relatively late, as well as words which are abbreviations of longer words, sometimes fail to exhibit tensing of /æ/; typical examples include <i>math</i> (shortened from<i> mathematics</i>),<i> adze</i> (typically learned late in childhood), <i>lad</i> and<i> lass</i> (which are purely literary words, never used in spontaneous speech; these exceptions were noted already by Trager 1940: 257 and appear to be characteristic of many dialects in which a split between lax /æ/ and tense /æ:/ has occurred). Moreover, tensing has spread beyond its original phonological environment in New York, and lexical exceptions have developed as it has spread (Labov<i> et al.</i> 1972: 49–50). Failure of tensing in abbreviations might actually be rule-governed, and borrowing from literary dialects is a relatively marginal feature in educated dialects of all kinds. At least some of the other lexical exceptions that have developed in New York might reasonably be ascribed to dialect borrowing and imperfect second-dialect learning, especially since the city has never ceased to be full of immigrants from the rest of the USA and elsewhere (see immediately below); but it is no longer possible to figure out exactly what happened by looking at the eventual outcome in a single speech community. If we look at the spread of


<!-- pdf-page: 69; source-page: 53 -->


tensing across the map, however, a much clearer pattern emerges. In southern New England tensing has been restricted to the position before anterior nasals (Labov <i>et al.</i> 1972: 48); in the industrial cities around the Great Lakes /æ/ is tensed in all positions (Labov 1994: 290, 429). Both developments are radical but regular simplifications of the rule. In Philadelphia /æ/ is tensed in fewer environments than in New York, normally appearing only before anterior nasals and anterior voiceless fricatives followed by word-end in fully stressed words (see the chart in Labov 1994: 520). However, a few positive lexical exceptions developed in Philadelphia: tensed /æ:/ appears in exactly three stressed monosyllables ending in /d/, namely in<i> mad</i>,<i> bad</i>, and<i> glad</i> (but not, for example, in<i> sad</i> /sæd/ or<i> dad</i> /dæd/). There are also a few negative exceptions: the past tenses<i> swam</i>,<i> began</i>, <i>ran</i>, and<i> wan</i> (the past of<i> win</i> in the Philadelphia vernacular) all exhibit lax /æ/, though tense /æ:/ appears in<i> pan</i>,<i> fan</i>,<i> van</i>,<i> man</i>,<i> Dan</i>,<i> ham</i>,<i> lamb</i>, etc. (Labov 1994: 430–2). Exactly how these lexical exceptions arose is now unrecoverable; the events lie too far in the past. But since it is clear that tensing of /æ/ spread, and almost certain that the Philadelphia speech community borrowed the change, we can infer with some confidence that this irregularity in the sound change was a result of borrowing.

Moreover, once lexical irregularities have arisen in this fashion, they become perturbing influences potentially giving rise to further irregularities. That is because a system including lexical irregularities is far more difficult to learn than one in which the phonological pattern is exceptionlessly rule-governed; even speakers of closely related dialects are unlikely to learn the distribution of exceptions perfectly. That is why it is reasonable to ascribe the lexical irregularities in the spread of tensed /æ:/ in New York to (sub-)dialect contact (see above); a probable example was noted already by Trager 1940: 256 (<i>family</i> with /æ/ or /æ:/). There is a considerable body of sociolinguistic data showing that the tensing of /æ/ has continued to spread in the Philadelphia area and that the spread proceeds lexeme by lexeme in the environment before /mV/, /nV/, and /lV/ (Labov 1994: 432–7 with references). We might therefore expect irregularities in the long-term pattern of sound change to cluster around the development of particular phonemic oppositions. We will return to that point in Chapter 5.

<b>Borrowing and/or native learning: the spread</b>

<b>of mergers</b>

We noted above that the geographic spread of mergers is a widespread and well-documented phenomenon. The dynamic which underlies this generalization has been discussed by Ruth Herold, who studied the expansion of the merger of /ɑ/ and /ɔ/ in some dialects of American English (in which the vowel of words like<i> caught</i> and<i> hawk</i>, which generally have /ɔ/ in North America, has come to be pronounced identically with the vowel of<i> cot</i> and<i> hock</i>, which


<!-- pdf-page: 70; source-page: 54 -->


generally have /ɑ/; Herold 1990: 86–106, 171–86). Herold suggests that, in border areas between dialects which exhibit the distinction between these vowels and dialects which lack it, speakers who have the distinction behave in a startling and characteristic way that actively promotes the spread of the merger. Although they must know subconsciously that the vowels which are undergoing merger are in principle distinct, because they can accurately<i> produce</i> the distinction in at least some circumstances, they claim that the two vowels “sound the same,” and in their fluent speech they can allow the ranges of variation of the two vowels to overlap to a considerable degree, making it more likely that children will fail to pick up the distinction in the course of language acquisition. The failure of speakers in border areas to maintain or acknowledge a distinction in pronunciation that they are capable of making (called the “Bill Peters effect” after an informant from near Harrisburg in whose speech the phenomenon was first noticed) appears to be an adaptive reaction to the fact that the distinction has little communicative use, since so many other people in the area neither make nor recognize it. In fact, since the pronunciations of those who no longer distinguish the two vowels typically range over the whole phonetic space originally occupied by the vowels – so that, in the case studied by Herold,<i> hock</i> may sound like “hock” or “hawk,” and <i>hawk</i> may equally well sound like “hock” or “hawk,” unpredictably and in no discernable pattern – the attempt to maintain a difference between the vowels will actually lead to more confusion than a determination to ignore it and to rely solely on context to disambiguate (Herold 1990: 226–9; see the discussion of mergers in native language acquisition [NLA] in Chapter 2). This is highly plausible because cross-dialectal confusion of that kind has actually been demonstrated in a range of cases in North American English (Labov 1994: 324–7). Since that asymmetry is a stable factor in the contact situation, it might be supposed to maintain the pressure for merger across generations, thus accounting for its long-term spread.

But other evidence suggests that something else is going on too. Herold’s realtime and apparent-time analyses of the trajectory of the merger show that in at least some towns it went to completion within about a generation (Herold 1990: 86–91, 94–9). That suggests that many speakers learned the merger in the course of NLA by the mechanism that Yang has posited (see the preceding chapter) – though the existence of speakers who can produce the distinction reliably (and thus must<i> not</i> have learned the merger in NLA) but profess not to hear any difference between the vowels shows that that cannot be the whole story. Clearly more research on this point, which is central to historical phonology, is urgently needed.

<b>The long-term direction of change</b>

The study of the increasing frequency of use of linguistic innovations faces a large issue which purely synchronic studies of frequency patterns do not: why does the frequency of use of alternative forms change over time, and why


<!-- pdf-page: 71; source-page: 55 -->


do changes so often go to completion, with a new form completely replacing an old one? The very existence of stable variation raises the possibility that every change could have developed into stable variation; therefore it also raises the question of why so many changes have not. One way of thinking about the spread of change, then, is that the variation found between new and old forms is not alternation but competition: the forms in variation are competing for use in the same environments and the form whose frequency is increasing is, for some reason, winning the competition.

From this perspective the crucial question in the study of the spread of new forms in language change is what advantage they have over the old forms they replace. The unanimous verdict of twentieth-century linguistics is that language change does not produce functionally improved languages; nineteenth-century notions of linguistic “superiority” have proved to be based on nothing more than Eurocentric bigotry, and observation readily shows that there is no correlation between the structure or typology of a language and the political fortunes or material or mental culture of its speakers. Consequently the question of what sort of competitive advantage an innovation can possibly have has not received a satisfactory answer.

Where can we look for indications of relative advantage of competing speechforms? Ideally we would like to find evidence in changes currently in progress, but it is surprisingly difficult to get the information that we need to solve this problem definitively. The<i> social</i> advantage of one form or another is generally clear, and we can say (for example) that such advantages are always highly localized, since it is the viewpoint of particular speakers in particular social contexts that matters. But the same pattern of social advantage is found in cases of stable variation as in cases of real change in progress! Evidently a more detailed investigation is necessary.

The obvious place to look for an answer to this question is the behavior of those individuals who are implementing an innovation in the most extreme fashion – that is, the most vigorous leaders of the change. In sufficiently well-studied cases those individuals are normally teenagers, typically girls, from the middle of the socioeconomic hierarchy (see Labov 2001: 168–70, 190, 385–411, 438–45). Actual measurements of vowel shifts seem to show that their advance in the female population is best modeled by the logistic function (see Kroch 1989: 203–6), which is typically generated by change in the frequency of competing alternatives, and that the age group that contributes the greatest increment of the change – the steepest part of the s-curve, so to speak – is younger teenagers (Labov 2001: 449– 60). They are literally the group driving the change forward, and it seems clear that each new cohort of younger teenage girls drives it a little further forward. That begins to explain why the pronunciations of vowels shift; does it also begin to offer an explanation for the increase in the frequency of an innovation?

As Labov observes, “[d]espite the fact that the community system advances over time, a girl who enters this system must quickly perceive that girls older than she is use more advanced forms of changing linguistic variables” (Labov 2001: 463). This is because of the following configuration of events. Each cohort


<!-- pdf-page: 72; source-page: 56 -->


of young children brings a new set of native acquisition errors into the speech community, and some of them are copied by peers and by younger children, thus becoming changes in progress; but individuals who are already adults at that time do not copy those errors or participate in those changes. A child a decade or more younger begins approximately with the variants of her mother, who belongs to the older generation and did not participate in the latest round of changes; thus with respect to changes already well under way she has some catching up to do. “In adopting these more advanced forms, the speaker is following the normal path of taking the behavior of older children as a model. Following the incrementation pattern, she eventually surpasses their level. This can occur only when they have become linguistic adults, with a stabilized phonology, while she is still advancing” (ibid.). The attempt to copy the speech of older children is inevitably overdone just a little, in the same way that the attempt of non-Yankees on Martha’s Vineyard to copy Yankee patterns was overdone, and the slight exaggerations of each age cohort quickly add up to a perceptible pattern of directed change. The exaggerations can and apparently do occur along at least two parameters: the innovative variants of continuous variables (such as vowels) become increasingly more extreme, and the frequency of the innovative variants increases steadily. While more work is needed to establish this scenario as a definitive explanation for female-led change, the hypothesis just outlined is well supported by the available facts and is highly plausible.

This hypothesis exhibits some interesting characteristics. One is that the relevant social factors must remain stable in order for the change to go to completion, because only under those circumstances will successive cohorts of teenagers continue to behave in the same way; thus it is social<i> stability</i>, not social change, that gives rise to at least some linguistic changes. Of course it is the same stability that allows us to recognize the logistic progression of the change, since altering the “rules” of competition between the variants could lead to a quite different competition. Finally, it is very striking that the striving of young people to be accepted by their older peers – an integral part of growing up in all human societies – can be a motor of linguistic change.

It would be highly convenient if the progress of all linguistic changes within a narrowly defined speech community could be described by this single model, but that would be too good to be true. For one thing, there has been hardly any study of how the (much rarer) male-led changes proceed and what drives them. For another, it is clear that drastic social change can also produce linguistic change. Very little is known about the latter phenomenon, but we can at least describe one case that has been studied.

<b>Change by loss of a stylistic register</b>

Goddard 1988 describes a set of apparent phonological changes over the past hundred years in Fox, an Algonkian language, which turn out to be


<!-- pdf-page: 73; source-page: 57 -->


something rather different from what a cursory inspection suggests. The situation can be summarized as follows.

Fox was well recorded in the decades immediately following 1900, and the language appears from the records to have been very conservative phonologically (by comparison with closely related languages). By 1968, however, an extensive series of phonological changes had taken place (Goddard 1988: 193–9). Intervocalic semivowels had been lost and the resulting vowels in hiatus (the only hiatuses in the language) had been shortened; thus “Classical” Fox <i>e:h</i>=<i>a:pi-ki:wita:ya:ni</i> ‘when I stayed’ has become<i> e:h</i>=<i>a:pi-kiitaa:ni</i>.† Wordfinal vowels have been lost in some environments and variably lost in others. A number of “functional” morphemes, often clitics, appear in what seem to have been allegro forms originally; for example,<i> pwa:wi</i> ‘not’ appears as<i> pai</i> (with loss of postconsonantal<i> w</i> in addition to the changes already noted above), and the future proclitic<i> wi:h</i>= appears as<i> i:h</i>=. The oldest speakers interviewed in 1968 still knew the older forms (with a few innovations, such as<i> pa:wi</i> for<i> pwa:wi</i>), but the youngest speakers had only an imperfect command of them, often restoring the wrong intervocalic semivowel, for instance (Goddard 1988: 197–9). It would appear that a great deal of phonological change occurred rapidly in Fox in the first half of the twentieth century.

But there is also some evidence that the innovative forms already existed at the beginning of the twentieth century. Several, including<i> pa:wi</i>,<i> pai</i>, and <i>i:h</i>=, appear in material collected in 1914 from a native speaker born in 1890; a few can be found in the extensive and otherwise conservative materials recorded by William Jones, such as<i> šepaita</i> for<i> šepawita</i> ‘it’s lucky’, and others occur in other material collected early in the twentieth century (Goddard 1988: 199–206). Most striking of all are the hypercorrect forms that occasionally appear in Jones’ classic texts. He regularly writes the preverb<i> ma:wi</i> ‘go and . . . ’ for correct<i> mawi</i> (confirmed by comparison with related languages), and he gives inanimate<i> ohpwa:kani</i> ‘pipe’ for the animate<i> ohpwa:kana</i> of other sources; these startling errors on the part of a scholar who was a speaker of the language can only be explained as incorrect attempts to construct formal forms on the basis of colloquial<i> mai</i> and<i> ohpwa:kan</i>, which must have been the forms Jones actually used in speaking (Goddard 1988: 200–2). In short, the stylistic diglossia typical of the oldest speakers in 1968 must have already existed before 1900. This fact is largely but not completely concealed by the decision of William Jones and others to record the most formal and conservative style of the language in their publications.

It follows that there was no rapid period of phonological change in twentiethcentury Fox. What happened was quite different and much simpler: successive cohorts of native learners did not receive adequate access to the formal style of the language during the developmental window of NLA. That might have

† See the Introduction on the transcription of Algonkian languages. In the forms cited here a hyphen marks the open juncture between members of a verbal compound, and “=” is a clitic boundary.


<!-- pdf-page: 74; source-page: 58 -->


been partly because an increasing number of young people were sent away to boarding schools for much of each year, where they were required to speak English and punished for speaking their native language (see Goddard 1988: 208 n. 7, who cautions that this is likely to have been only one factor). In any case the increasing use of English in the Fox-speaking community has contributed heavily to the obsolescence of the formal register, which is phonologically more conservative at virtually every point of difference; as a result, the more innovative colloquial style has become the only form of the language natively available to most of its speakers (Goddard 1988: 206–8). Thus the linguistic consequences of social change have triggered structural change in Fox by eliminating its more formal and conservative register from use.

It should be emphasized that this change in Fox was not an aspect of language death; in 1968, when the modern pattern of linguistic knowledge and use was reported, the language was still almost universally used in the community (Goddard 1988: 195). How common this type of externally motivated register shift might be is unknown, since no one has looked for other cases (so far as we know). In the present state of our knowledge we also do not know what other kinds of social change can lead to changes internal to a language (as opposed to the obsolescence or death of the language), though it is a fair bet that the range of phenomena which actually exist is much wider than the range which has been studied.

<b>After variation: going to completion</b>

Most of the changes that have been discussed in this chapter are innovative “phonetic implementation” rules, below the level of surface contrast, because the spread of that type of change through the speech community has been most thoroughly investigated. When such a change goes to completion, native learners begin to acquire it as a fixed rule of the phonology. At that point it crosses another threshold in its development, since it has become part of the computational system which must be learned in acquiring native competence in the language. Its further development is in consequence very different in character. We will deal with the fate of phonological rules in Chapter 6.
