---
title: "Dictionary — I"
author: "Michiel de Vaan"
date: "2008"
source_type: mixed
extraction_date: 2026-05-07
source_file: "vaan-2008-latin-italic-dialects.pdf"
chunk: "Letter I"
---

# I


<!-- pdf-page: 306; printed-page-estimate: 292 -->

iacio, -ere 'to throw' [v. Ill; pf iecf, ppp. iacturn] (Lex XII+) Derivatives: iactus, -us 'throw, cast' (PL+), iaculus [adj.] 'used for throwing' (PL), iaculum 'throwing-spear' (Sis.+), iaculari 'to throw, shoot' (Lucr.+); iacere 'to He'

<!-- pdf-page: 307; printed-page-estimate: 293 -->

(iacui, iacitum) (Pl.+), adiacens 'neighbouring1 (Caecil.+), obiacere 'to lie nearby, obstruct' (Enn.+); abicere (abieci, abiectum) 'to throw away' (Naev,+), ad(i)icere 'to throw at, add, attach' (Pl.+), amicire {amicul/amixi, amictum) 'to cover, clothe' (Naev.+), amictus, -us 'garment' (Titin.+), amiculum 'cloak' (Pl.+), circumicere 'to put round' (Varro+), circumiectus, -us 'wrap' (Varro+), co(n)icere 'to throw, dispatch, form' (Pl.+), coniector 'soothsayer' (Pl.+), coniectrix 'female interpreter' (PL), coniectura 'inferring, reasoning' (Pl.+), coniectus, -us 'te throwing' (Lucr.+), deicere 'to throw down' (Pl.+), disicere 'to break up, disperse' (Enn.+), disiectus, -us 'dispersal' (Lucr.), eicere 'to throw out, remove' (Pl.+), eiectus, -us 'expulsion' (Lucr.), in(i)icere 'to throw in, put on' (PI.+), intericere 'to throw between' (Varro+), obicere 'to throw in the way, put before' (P1-+), obiectus, -us 'interposition' (Lucr,+), porricere 'to offer as a sacrifice' (Pl.+), proicere 'to throw forth, fling' (Naev.+), pwiecficius 'abandoned' (PL), proiectus, -us 'projection' (Lucr.), reicere 'to throw back, reject' (Pl.+), reiculus 'discarded' (Varro+), subicere 'to throw from below, make subject' (LuciL+), traicere 'to thrust, transport' (Cato+), traiectus, -Us 'crossing' (Acc.+); iactare cto throw, toss, brag' (Pl.+), coniectare 'to infer' (Ter.+), disiectare 'to scatter' (Lucr+), obiectare 'to object' (Pl.+), proiectare 'to banish' (Enn.), reiectare 'to repulse' (Lucr.+), subiectare 'to throw up from below' (Pac.+); obex, -ids [m.j 'bolt, barrier' (Verg.+), subices, -um [f.pl.] 'underlying parts' (Enn.+)* Pit. *jak-i- 'to throw', *jak-e- 'to lie down'. * PIE aor. *(H)iehr, pr. *(H)ihrk-(i-) 'to throw, let go'. IE cognates: Hit. peie^/pei- ( » peiie/a-) cto send') < PIE *Ηφοΐ +*hj/3iehrti, ^hmihrenti\ Gr. ΐημι 'to send (away), let go, throw, hurl' < pr. *(H)i-(H)iehr, aor. έηκα, ήκα, inf. έμεναν, είναι, fut. ήσω, Myc. (jo-)i-je-si [3p.pr.]. In Schrijver's view (1991: 411, 2003), amicire may show thematization of *ambic-i-. Lat. iacere can be interpreted as the stative counterpart of iacio 'to throw'; hence, the meaning was 'to be thrown down' > 4to lie'. The meaning shows that iacio must have been primary, as is also shown by -k-. The nouns continue *-iak-s, -iak-os. It is possible that iac- is the phonetic outcome of PIE *(H)ihjk- (Schrijver 1991: 171), compare vacuus; iac- is the only form in ia- of this structure. If not phonetic, iacio might be explained analogically from the proportion^c/o —JecJ: *icid- ieci Bibl.: WH I: 666f., EM 303f., IEW 502, Leumann 1977: 128, 553, Schrijver 1991: 163, Meiser 1998: 212, Untermann 2000: 158f., LIV *Hiehr.

iam 'now, already' [adv.] (Lex XII, Andr.+) PIE *hji-h₂-m [ace] 'this'. IE cognates: see s.v. is. Probably *iam. Since the meaning of the adverbs in *-<5m (acc.sg.f.) was 'as far as, in respect of, *iam meant 'as far as this is concerned' > 'now'. Possibly, *iam is a remake of ΡΪΕ acc.sg. *Tm 'he, she', with *-am from other inflected pronouns (quam etc,)' Later, the form was replaced by earn. Bibl.: WH I: 668, EM 304, IEW 28Iff. -> is; -dam, nam, quam, tarn

<!-- pdf-page: 308; printed-page-estimate: 294 -->

ianitrices, -urn 'wives of brothers' [f.pl. k] (only in LLat glosses. The vowel length in the initial syllable is therefore unknown.) Pit. *jenater~? PIE *ienh₂-ter- 'wife of husband's brother'. IE cognates: Skt yatar- [1] 'husband's brother's wife' (AVP+), MoP yar- 'id.' < *yauri-, Isfahan! dial, yaci, Pash. yor 'id.' < Ilr. *jata (or *ianta\ gen. *iatras\ Gr. εινατέρες, -έρων [f. (pi.)] 'wife of the husbands brother', voc. εΐνατερ, gen. -τερος (Hdn.), sg. ένατηρ, -τρι, -τερα (in late Anat. inscr.); Arm. ner9 gen. niri (*ienHr > *Hin- > Bn- > n-, cf, Kortlandt 1997a); OLHh.jentey Lith. inte 'husband brother's wife, wife's sister, daughter-in-law', Latv. ietere, ietaja 'id.1; CSj^try 'husband's brother's wife', j$trbve [gen.sg.], Ru.jatrov' (dial.), ORu. jatry, OCz. jatrev, SCr. jetrva, jetrva, jetrva < PSl. *jpry (w//-stem in analogy to *svekry)m PIE *ienfi2-ter- would have regularly resulted in *ienater- > *ieniter-. Schrijver's conjecture of a development *inHtr- > *iantr- is ad hoc. In front of -/r-, we would expect *ienetr-, but the suffixation of -ik- may be recent, and *ienitnk- may have adopted -/- from an earlier form *ie/aniter~. Alternatively, the f. ianitrix 'portress, gate-keepster' (PL+) may have influenced our noun, but this seems far-fetched. In view of the changes from ianuarius > ienuarius and idiunus > ieiunus in Imperial Latin, ianitrices (which does not seem to have been a commonly used word anymore) may be a hypercorrection for *ienitrJces. Differently, Hamp 1982-83a: 102 starts from an ablauting paradigm *ienatr- beside *inatr~; the latter form would have received a secondary full grade *ianatr- by analogy. Yet it is unclear what the model for the introduction of *ia- would have been. Bibl.: WH I: 668, EM 304f., IEW 505f., Schrijver 1991: 107f., 219, 490, Kortlandt 1997a, Beekes 2003: 163.

ianus 'arched passage, doorway; god of gates and doors' [m. ο] (Pl.+; w-stem only in Fest.; VLat. ienuarius, PRom. *ienua) Derivatives: ianua 'door, entrance' (Pl.+), lanualis 'of Janus' (Varro), Ianuarius [adj.] '(month) of Janus' (Varro+), ianitor 'doorkeeper' (Pl.+), ianitrix 'female doorkeeper' (PL+). Pit. *janu- 'door1. PIE *ieh₂-n-u- 'passage'. IE cognates: Olr. ath 'ford, passage' < PCI. *jafl/-; Skt. yati 'to go, travel', yayi- 'hastening, running1, yatar- [m.] 'charioteer', yestha- 'going the fastest'; Lith.yori 'to go, ride', Latv.ya/ 'to drive, to go'; CSjaxati 'ride', Ru. exat\ SCr. jahati 'to go' < PSl. *jexatL ToABya- 'to go, travel', ΤΌΒ yohiya 'path, way, course'. Although all old attestations show ianus as an o-stem, the derivative ianua suggests that the earlier noun was a astern. Ianua can be an original plural (or dual?) to this stem. The oldest meaning will have been 'passage, corridor'. The n-derivative might be a shared inheritance of Italic and Tocharian. Bibl.: WH I: 668f., EM 305, IEW 296, Schrijver 1991: 142, LIV l.*ieh₂-.

<!-- pdf-page: 309; printed-page-estimate: 295 -->

ibi 'there' [adv.] (Andr.+) Derivatives: ibidem 'in that very place, in the same place' (Naev.+), inibi 'there' (Pl.+). Pit *ipeii*ifei <there\ It. cognates: U. ife, ife [adv.] 'there' < *tf/W; U. ifont [adv.] 'at the same place' = ife + particle -hont. PIE *h₁i-dhei or *hii-bhei. IE cognates: Skt. iha, idha 'here', OAv. ida, YAv. ida 'here, in the same way' < PIE *hii-dhe; possibly Gr. ΐΰα(ι)γενής 'bom from a lawful marriage, indigenous'; OCS kbde 'where' < *kwu-dhe. Theoretically, ibT can directly reflect *ibhei, with a suffix that recalls the ins.pl. ending *-bhi. It is also possible that ibi has adopted -b- from ubT 'where', in which b can reflect *dh. In that case, the deictic suffix *-dhi (also *-dhe) is the origin. In view of the closely parallel formation of Skt. iha, I have a slight preference for a preform in *-c?eL Bibl.: WH I: 669, EM 305, IEW 28Iff., Leumann 1977: 168, Untermann 2000: 339. -> -ife, is

IcO, -ere 'to strike, smite' [v. Ill; pf. Tci, ppp. ictwri] (Andr.+) Derivatives: ictus, -us 'stroke, blow' (Pl.+). Pit, *ike/o- [pr.]. PIE pr. *h₂i-h₂ik-e/o- 'to hit, pierce', ?pf. *h₂i-h₂it-, ppp. *h₂ik-to-. IE cognates: Gr. αιχμή 'point of a spear, spear'., Myc. ai-ka-sct-ma /aiksma/; OPr. aysmis 'spit', Lith. iesmas 'spit, bayonet* < *h₂ei£(s)mos OPr. ayculo 'needle', Ru. igla, SCr. igia 'id.' < PS1. *jbgbla < *h₂eik-tlo- (?). . t ?

Bibl.: WH I: 670, EM 305, IEW 15, Peters 1980: 108, Schrijver 1991: 37, Meiser 2003: 215, UV*h₂eik-.

idem, eadem, idem 'the same' [pron., adj.] (Andr.+) Derivatives: identidem 'repeatedly' (Pl.+). It. cognates: comparable formations are O. isidum, isidu, esidum, esidu[m, εισειδομ, ειζιδρμ [nom.sg.m.], iussu, iusu, iusum [nom.pl.m.] 'the same' < *is-id + particle *-om (sg.), *ejos + *-o(m) (nom.pl.). Conflation of the pronoun isy ea, id with enclitic -(d)em. VOLat. *isdem yields idim. The element -dem was metanalysed from n. */d!-eiw, analysed as lidrdemL In other case forms with s (eosdem etc.), s has been restored. Bibl.: WH I: 671, EM 306, IEW 181ff., Leumann 1977: 467f., Sihler 1995: 392, Meiser 1998: 161, Untermann 2000: 347f → -dem, is

idoneus 'suitable, appropriate' [adj. ο/α] (Pl.+) No etymology. The morphology can be interpreted as an adj. in -neus to *ido ('there'?) or *ido-, or as an adj. in -eus to *idon* But neither form yields a probable etymology, Bibl.:WHI:671f.,EM306.

idos, -uum ' 15th or 13th day of the month (depending on the month)' [f.pl. u] (Cato+) It. cognates: O. eiduis, eiduis, [abl.pl.] probably the 13lh or 15th day of each month.

<!-- pdf-page: 310; printed-page-estimate: 296 -->

No Latin etymology. According to Varro, the word was borrowed from Etruscan, and that may well be true. Bibl.: WH I: 672, EM 306f., Untermann2000:203f.

iecur 'liver* [n, r/n\ (Pl.+): nom.voc.acc.sg. iecur (passim), nom.sg. iocur (lx Plin.), gen.sg. iocineris (Liv., Larg., Celsus), iecinoris (Larg.), iecoris (Cic. lx, Liv, lx), abl.sg, iecore (Pac), iocinore (VMax.), iecinore (Larg.), datsg. iecori, nom.acc.voc.pl. iocinera (passim), dat.abl.pl. iocineribus (passim), gen.pl. iecorum (Cic. lx), iocinerum (Plin. lx) Pit. *jekwor [n,], *jekwen~. PIE *iekw-r/n- [n.] 'liver\ IE cognates: Skt. yakrU gen.ablsg. yaknas 'liver' (RV+), locsg. yokoni (AV), Av. yakars (see de Vaan 2003: 68f.), Khot. gyagarra (< *ιαΙφηα-)> MP/agar, MoPjigar, Oss, igcer 'liver'; Gr. ήπαρ, gen.sg. ήπατος 'liver', OCS ikra 'roe', Ru, ikra 'roe, spawn, caviar, calf (of the leg)', ikro (dial.) < PS1. jbkra,jbkro < PIE *ikw-r-eh₂; OPr, yccroy '(anat) calf, Lith. ikras [m.] 'fish-egg, (anat.) calf, [pL] roe, spawn, caviar'; OPr. lagno [iagno], Lith. jeknos (dial.) [m,], jekanas (Bretkflnas) 'liver' [m.], Latv. aknas [nom.pLf ] < PIE *iekw-n-h₂-. The attestations show ie- in all di- and trisyllabic forms (one exception: iocur in Pliny), and io- in most four- and fivesyllabic forms (two exceptions: iecinore and iecinoris in Larg.). This points to a phonetic ratio: in pretonic position, we find io-, whereas the syllable that was stressed in pre-classical and in CLat. has ie-. Thus, one might regard only ie- as old, and io- as a weakening in pretonic position, compare ianitrices < *ienitrices. Yet such a weakening seems strange, and we have no way to verify it since io- further only occurs in the disyllable iocus. Klingenschmitt 1992 assumes a metathesis of the first and third vowel in ^iecinoris to iocineris, a metathesis which would have served the goal to restore the ending -ineris which occurs in itineris. In that case, one wonders why the Romans did not make *iecinerisy but introduced a strange o. Rix 1965 proposes to explain the -o- on the basis of a PIE locative *iokw-en. This seems hazardous to me on comparative grounds (no evidence for o-grade elsewhere) and because of the distribution within Latin as described above. Bibl.: WH I: 673, EM 307, IEW 504, Rix 1965, Klingenschmitt 1992: 118, Sihler 1995: 300, Meiser 1998: 142, Weiss (fthc.a).

ieiOnus 'fasting, hungry' [adj. o/a] (PL+; phonologically Heii-f) Derivatives: ieiiinitas 'soberness, hunger' (Pl.+), ieiimium 'fasting' (PL+), ieiuniosus 'hungry' (PL+); ieientare 'to have breakfast' (Afiran.+), ieieniaculum 'breakfast' (Pl.+). Pit. *jagje/o-, *jagju-, *jagjiino-. PIE *Hieh₂g-ie/o- [v.] 'to sacrifice', *Hieh₂g-iu- [adj.]. IE cognates: Pllr. *iaj- > Skt. pr. yajati, ppp, ista- 'to honour, worship, sacrifice', su-yaj- 'sacrificing well', yajus- [n.] 'worshipping, act of sacrifice', yastar-, yastar- [m.] 'sacrificed, yajyu- 'praiseworthy', Av. yaza- 'to worship', ista-, yasta- [ppp.], yastar- 'worshipper', OP yada- 'to worship', ά-yadana- [n.] 'sacrificial place'; Gr. άγιος (Hdt.), αγνός (Η.) 'holy', δζομαι (< *αγ]ομαι) 'to honour'. In the oldest layer of Plautus mss,, Skutsch 1892 has found iai-, a spelling which also

<!-- pdf-page: 311; printed-page-estimate: 297 -->

appears in Pliny. This must be the older form, which underwent assimilation to iei-. The two oldest words are then iaiunus and iaientare, phonologically liaii-L Forssman 1993 explains them from Pit. *iagi-, to the root PIE *ih₂g- 'to sacrifice'. He reconstructs an adj. *iagiu- 'opferfreudig' (to Skt. yajyu-\ which was remade into *iagiuno- in Latin, and a present *iag-ie/o 'to sacrifice' (to Gr. αζομαι). The verb iaientare would have been built on an nt-stem *iaiient- < *iag-jent-, These words would be based on the habit to perform the first sacrifice of the day on an empty stomach. Bibl.: WH I: 674f., EM 307, IEW 501 f., Leumann 1977: 54, Meiser 1998: 80, LIV *Hiag-.

igitur 'in that case, then* [cj.] (Lex XII, Andr.+) Probably the post-tonic development of *agetor 'it is done' (> agitur) after e.g. quid, Bibl.: WH I: 675, EM 307, Leumann 1977: 82. → ago

ignis Tire' [m. /] (Lex XII+) Derivatives: ignescere 'to catch fire' (Lab.+), igneus 'of fire, fiery' (Lucr.+), ignifer 'bearing fire* (Lucn+). Pit *nfni- 4fire\ PIE *htngw-ni- '(a) fire*. IE cognates: Hit. aknis 4a deity* (borrowed from Ilr.), Skt. agni- 'fire\ Lith. ugnis, OCS ognjb, Ru. ogon\ SCr. oganj Tire' [m.] < Late-BSl. *ugni- < Early-BSl. *ungni- < PIE *h|ngw-ni-; Skt-angara- 'coal\ Sogd/nk'yr 'hearth' < *angariia-, Arm. acowl 'coal*, Lith. anglis [mj, Latv. uogle, OCS pglb [mj, Ru. ugoV 'coal' < BS1. *on?glis < PIE *hiongw-l-. Lat. ignis shows a development from PIE *Hpgwni- > *Hangnl· > *engni- > with dissimilation *egni- (or > *ingni- > igni-). Bibl.: WH I: 676, EM 307£, IEW 293, Schrijver 1991; 63f, 416,484.

ignOro, -are 'to have no knowledge, be ignorant' [v. I] (Pl.+) Derivatives: ignorantia 'ignorance' (Lucr.+). Pit. *gnos~(e/ciy PIE *gneh₃-s- \to recognize, know'. IE cognates: Hit. kane/iss-zl 'to recognize, acknowledge* < *gneh₃-s-ti, *gnh₃-s-enti; Skt. s-aor. ajnasam, ajnasthas 'to recognize', ToA kriasast 'you recognized*.

The verb ignorare has been regarded as a denominal verb to ignarus; according to this view, the vowel *<5 was replaced by δ on the model of ignotus. Yet it seems highly unlikely that *en-gnarare was replaced by *en-gndrare, while the adj, gnarus 'knowing' itself was left unchanged. Nussbaum (2007b) has proposed a more likely solution: ignorare reflects a sa-present *gno-sa- 'to know' of the once productive Latin type, derived from a noun *gno-sa- 'knowledge*, or more directly from its source, a PIE ^-present as found in Hittite. Bibl.: WH I: 614, EM 279, IEW 376-378, LIV *gneh₃-, -> gloria, gnarus, nosco

<!-- pdf-page: 312; printed-page-estimate: 298 -->

Ilex, -ids 'holm-oak, ilex' [f. k] (Enn.+) Derivatives: ilignus 'ofthe holm-oak' (Ten+)> iligneus 4 of the holm-oak' (Cato+). No etymology. The adj\ ilignus reflects *iliknos < pre-syncope *Tlik-ino-s. Bibl.: WH I: 678, EM 308, Leumann 1977: 287, 321,

Hia, -ium 'side part of the body, from the hips to the groin' [n.pL id] (Cat+) No etymology. The Gm. words adduced by WH (cf OFr. Hi, OE He 'footsole', MLG ele 'callus', OIc. il 'footsole') have short */'-. Gr. ϊλια [n.pL] 4female body-parts' (Hsch.) might be a loan from Latin. Bibl.: WH I: 678, EM 308, IEW 499,

ille, ilia, illud 'that' [pron.adj. o/a] (LexXII+) Derivatives: iffic, -aec, -uc 'that, the following' (PL+); adverbs: ilia 4by that way, there' (PL+), iliac 4by that way' (PL+), Hit 'there' (PL+), illlc 'there, then' (Naev,+), illim 'thence' (PL+), illinc 'from that place' (Naev.+), Hid 'thither' (Naev.+), Hide 'thither5 (Andr.+), illuc 'thither' (PU). This pronoun replaces olle / ollus. The change of o- to /- is generally explained from analogy with iste, although Sihler 1995 considers a proclitic form *e/fe, which turned to ille by phonetic influence of / exilis. If ollus derives from *ο/-κο-, the original nom.sgm must have been ollus. Lat olle may go back to nom.sg.rn, *o/-so, as in iste < *es-to. Bibl.: WH I: 679£, EM 309, IEW 24-26, Leumann 1977: 470, Meiser 1991: 163, Sihler 1995: 394. -> olle/ollus

imago, -inis 'picture, image' [f. n\ (PL+) Derivatives: imitare (Andr., Van), imitari 'to copy, imitate' (PL+). Pit, *ima(je-). PIE *h₂i-m-h₂- 'image'. IE cognates: Hit. himma- 'imitation, substitute'. Both the frequentative imitare/ϊ and imago can be derived from an earlier verb *ima-je/o-. If this is cognate with aemulus (< ^eim-elo-, probably dim. to earlier *h₂eim-o-), it suggests a noun *ima- from which the verb was derived, since thematic stems do not normally have ablaut. The PIE root is poorly attested; we only find a few nominal derivatives. Devoto 1967 suggests a deverbal origin from *imare 'to copy' from a root aor. */w-e- to a root *iem- which he sees in Skt yama-, OAv, ysma- 'twin'; but no verbal forms which could be cognate have been discovered. Bibl.: WH I: 680, EM 309, Leumann 1977: 369, Schrijver 1991: 38, 74, Meiser 1998: 106. -+aemulus

imbecillus 'physically weak, fragile' [adj. o/a) (Afran.+; also /-stem) The word has been etymologized as *n-bak(t)lelo- 'without a (walking) stick' > 4 weak' because of a Juvenal scholia: imbecillis: quasi sine baculo. The meaning is hardly compelling: it seems to me that exactly the persons who can walk without a support are the stronger ones. In addition, imbecillus has long e in Lucr. and Horace.

<!-- pdf-page: 313; printed-page-estimate: 299 -->

EM suggest original *imbeccillus9 which would have arisen on the model οι vaccillo vs. vacillo. This is very far-fetched. I conclude that the word is without etymology. Bibl.: WH I: 92, EM 309f.5 IEW 93. → baculum

imber, -bris crain, rain shower' [m. /] (PL+) Derivatives: imbrex, -icis 'semi-cylindrical tile, placed over the joints between roof-tiles' (Pl.+), 'a curved plate' (Cato), imbricus 'rainy' (Pl.+), imbricitor 'who causes rain' (Enn.+). Pit *B/frw- 'cloud'. It. cognates: O. anafriss 'to the rain deities [dat.pl.]. PIE *nbh-r-o- '(rain) cloud'. IE cognates: Skt abhra- 'cloud', Av. afira- 'rain, rain-cloud', Khot. ora- 4sky'; Gr. αφρός [m.] 'foam, saliva' (the appurtenance of the Gr. word is less certain because of the meaning; still, it is conceivable); Arm. amb, amp'cloud'. The adj. imbricus corresponds to a productive type in -icus, whereas imbric-itor is a typical Ennian neologism. The vowel e in imbrex < *imbri-k-s is irregular (Leumann 1977: 375) for *-ix, but can easily be explained from analogy, as indeed can the whole suffix. Most of the nouns in -ex/-ix, -icis are non-IE, and in the technical sphere we also find, e.g., ipumex, apex, irpex, silex, calix, fornix. Especially fornex Vault, arch₁ (Enn.+) and apex 'top, crown' (Lucil.+, Varro) are close to imbrex. For PIE we can reconstruct an o-stem *nljhro- 'cloudy, misty', from which an /-stem noun was derived. r \. /* Bibl.: WH I: 680£, EM 310/lEW 315£, Schrijver'1991: 64, Meiser 1998: 106, Untermann 2000: 95£ → amtirices, nebula

imbuO, -ere 'to drench, wet; to fill1 [v. Ill; pf. irnbw, ppp, imbutum] (Pl.+) Pit. *enpu-. PIE *h₁en-dhhru- 'in-placemenf. Weiss 2007a: 374f. observes that most of the OLat forms of this verb concern the ppp. or the passive, so that the etymological analysis should start from imbiitus. This could be a deihstrumental adj. *en-dthiuhrto- * having in-placement' to a w-stem *en-cfhj-u- 'in-placement'; the latter noun Weiss regards as a substantivization of an earlier adj. compound *en-cfhj-o- 'placed/placing in1. The verb imbuo, then, continues an etymon made up of ^ e n 'in' and *dhehr 'to put', which apparently was applied especially to drenching something or someone in a liquid, steeping clothes in dye, etc. The reflex b of *d* in front of vocalic *w may have been regular; it is supported by Weiss' analysis of tribus (see s.v.). A different etymology was proposed by Panagl-Lindner 1995: 167ff, who separate 4to drench₁ from 'to fill with'. As they show themselves, however, this is not supported by the chronology of the attestations. For imbuere 'to fill with', Panagl-Lindner posit *en-bhuhrje/o- 'to plant; attach (oneself)', cognate with Gr. έμφύω 'to grow on; to plant\ Formally this is possible, although Latin normally has^a- for this root; but semantically I see no reason why we should connect 'to drench' with 'to grow'. Bibl.: WH I: 682, EM 310.

<!-- pdf-page: 314; printed-page-estimate: 300 -->

immo 'rather, on the contrary' [ptcle. introducing the correction of a preceding statement, giving a negative answer to a question] (Naev.+) Pit, *imm6(C). PIE *im-moH? IE cognates: Hit. immo 'truly, indeed', CLuw. immo, HLuw. imci [adv.] 'indeed'. Etymology uncertain. Semantically, an abl.sg. *imd to imus 'lowest, last5 would be a good candidate, but the scansion as immo would be irregular. Could it be due to the expressiveness of the negative semantics? The Anatolian forms immo look suspiciously similar in form and meaning; they might contain PEE */m [acc.sg.] plus a form *moh₂ (thus Kloekhorst 2008: 384), or maybe *mohu an o-grade variant of *mehi 'not', which has a similar contrastive meaning. Yet for Latin, the preservation of geminate *-wm- up to the literary period would be unexpected. Bibl.: WH I: 682f, EM 310, Melchert 1985. — imus, inde

imus 'lowest, deepest, innermost' [adj. o/a] (Naev.+) It. cognates: perhaps O. imad [abl.sg.f]'?' (if'down below'). PIE *ndh-mHo-? The explanation is disputed. WH and Meiser assume that imus somehow represents a remodelling of infimus (synonym with imus, and the more usual word) after summus. In view of summits < *supemo- < *sup-mHo-, one could envisage a phonetic development *infimos > *infinos > *immos > imus. The co-occurring form Infimus would be due an earlier paradigmatic alternation of syncopted forms (in front of a long-vowel ending) and unsyncopated ones, e.g. nom.sg. *infimos, gen.sg. *infmi Cowgill 1970: 130 proposes a proportion *su-perior : su-mmus — in-ferior : X, X = *in-mmus, but this morphological analysis is too artificial. Bibl.: WH I: 685f., EM 311, Meiser 1998: 152, Untermann 2000: 341 f. → Jnfems

in 'into, in5 [prep., prev.] (VOLat.+; Duenos inscr. en, Lex XII+ in) Derivatives: intus [adv.] 'inside, within' (Pl.+). Pit. *en 'in', *entos 'inside'. It. cognates: Ven. es 'unto' < *ens9 entol 'inside' < *entos + I- of the next word; O. en [prep. + gen.], Pael. i [prep. + ace.]; postpos. + ace: O. -en, Pael. -e, U. -em, -en, -e, -e; postpos. + abl.: O. -en, -en; postpos. + loc.: (λ -in, Vest. -(e)n, U. -en, -em, -eme, SPic. -in, -en 'in, at (loc), into (acc.)> for (gen.)\ As preverb: O. em-, Pael. em-, in-, U. en-. PIE *hi(e)n 'in5, *hientos '(from) inside'. IE cognates: Olr. in-, en-, f, OW, OBret. en, in 'in5, W. yn-\ Skt. aniko-, YAv. ainika- [m.] 'face' < *h|eni-h₃kw-o-; Gr. εν, ένι, Aim. i, OPr. en, Latv. ie- *in\ Lith. j 'in(to)' [prep. / pref], OCS vt(n) , Ru. v(o) , SCr. w 'in(to)' < BSL *m-; Go. in, OHG OS OE in, OIc. i; ToAB^,^-, ToB in- 'in\ Gr. εντός 'inside5 [adv., prep.]. The change en > in is regular in unstressed position and in front of several consonants. From there, in was generalized. Whereas most IE languages continue PIE *h₁en, BS1. requires a zero grade *h₁n. Bibl.: WH I: 687f, EM 312f., IEW 31 Iff, Lejeune 1974: 334, Schrijver 1991: 37, Sihler ,1995: 439f, Untermann 2000: 223-225. → endo, inter, iniestmus

<!-- pdf-page: 315; printed-page-estimate: 301 -->

in- 'not, un-' [pref.] (Lex XII+); assimilates to following consonant: im- in front of b-/p-/m-, U- before /-, ir- before r-, ϊ- before g-. Pit. *w-. It cognates: O. an-, am-, U. a-, an-, a-. Only before adj. and fo-participles. PEE *n- 'not, un-\ IE cognates: Olr. in-, e-, an-, W. Co. Bret» an- 'not, un-'; Skt. Av. OP a-, in front of vowels an- £un-, -less', Gr. ά-5 in front of vowels άν-; also νη-, να-, νω- < *w-/j//2/jC-; Go. OHG OS un-, OIc. ό-, w-; ToAB a(n)- , am-, e(n)- , em-, on-. The form in- has regularly developed in front of consonants; from there, it replaced antevocalic *en-* PIE *«- is the zero grade of the negative ptcle. *ne 'not'. Bibl.: WH I: 686f., EM 31 If, IEW 756ff., Leumann 1977: 386f., Untermann 2000: 93f. → ne-, ne, ηϊ

inSnis 'empty, hollow' [adj. i] (Naev.+) Derivatives: inaniae [f pi.] 'nothingness' (Pl.)5 inanlre 'to make empty' (Lucr.+); inanilogista [m.] 'babbler' (PL). The chronology of attestations suggests that 'empty, devoid of is older than 'hollow*. No certain etymology. Bibl.:WHI:688f.,EM314.

inciens 'big with young (of a female)' [adj. nt\ (Varro+) On the strength of the comparison with Gr. κυέω 'to be pregnant', inciens is mostly analysed as a derivative of the^PIE root *kuH- 'to swell'. The formal aspects of this etymology are disputed. According to Thumeysen's' rule (cf Meiser 1998: 86 and Schrijver 1991: 322-324), *« became ί before */, yielding a phonetic change *£uH-ie- > *kiije- > *kije-. Yet according to Schrijver 2003 and 2006: 50, the sequence *kuH-ie- would undergo a development to *kwTje- in Proto-Italo-Celtic, whence we expect Lat. *qiti-. This problem is absent from the other examples for Schrijver's rule {plus, suffire, fieri) since *w might have disappeared after the labial obstruent. An alternative etymology is the following. The attestations show that inciens meant a woman 'at the verge of parting' (Paul ex F. inciens propinqua partui) as opposed to gravida and praegnans, which were more general terms for 'pregnant'. Of course, this might be a recent semantic specialization. Nevertheless, if inciens derives from a verb *inciere of the same semantic structure as incipere £to take in hand, start, begin an action', it could mean 'starting to give rise to, giving birth'. In that case, it would be a simple and recent derivative of tied. Bibl.: WH I: 690, EM 314, IEW 592if, Meiser 1998: 86, Schrijver 1991: 322ff, 2003: 77f, LIV *kuehr. —> cavus, tied, cumulus

indiges, -etis 'epithet of certain gods' [m., adj. /] (Verg.+) Derivatives: indigitare 'to invoke (deities) by certain formulas' (Varro+), indigitamenta [n.pl.] 'certain formulas used in invoking deities' (Paul, ex F.). Pit. *end[o]-ag-et- 'working within'. The noun indiget- can be a derivative in *-o/et- of a compound *endo-ag-o- * working within (the community)', cf. inter-pret- 'go-between', prae-stes, -stit- 'witness*. The

<!-- pdf-page: 316; printed-page-estimate: 302 -->

verb indigitare will then be a recent derivative from the noun, meaning 'to turn to the indigites\ Bibl.: WH I: 693, EM 315. -> ago, endo

indulges 'to be indulgent' [v. II; pf. indulsi, ppp. indultum] (Ter.+) Derivatives: indulgitds 'leniency' (Caelius, Sisenna). Pit *-άο\χ-ε-. PIE *dlgh-ehr 'to be(come) fixed'? IE cognates: Gaul, delgu [ls.pr.] (?) 'to hold' < PCI. *delge/o-, MW daly, data 'to hold', OBret. delgim 'to hold' < *da!ge/o- (< PIE *dlg-ske/o~); Skt. dfmha- [pr.], dfhya [2s.ipv.act.] 'to fix, make firm', OAv. didBrzzo [2s.desid.inj.act] 'to desire to fasten', d&raz- 'fetter', YAv. darzzaiia- 'to fasten, tie', darzzra- 'firm, strong'; Go. tulgjan 'to fasten\

Probably a compound verb, with as a first member *en- 'in', *w- 'not' or *end(o) 'in', and as the second member *dVlg- or *Wg- or (after *end-) *(d)IVg-. Indulgere has been compared with longus, under the assumption that 'to be indulgent with someone' can mean 'to show perseverance, wait a long time'. But the nasalless variant of this adj. (PIE *dlHgh-) is not attested in Italic. A connection with langueo has been proposed, and is semantically better, but the root was *slh₂g-. LIV connects the root *delgh- 'to be hard, get fixed'. If the verb was a causative *dolgh-eie, one could posit a semantic shift from 'let so. become hard' to 'let so. get his way, be indulgent toward so/ Yet initial in- remains hard to explain. If analysed as a stative verb in *-eAr, indulged might be derived from a negated form of an adj. *n-dl$-ro- 'not hard\ Thus *n-dlgh-ehr 'not to be hard toward' - 'to be lenient toward, indulge'. Bibl.: WH I: 694f, EM 315, IEW 196f., Schumacher 2004: 271f., LIV *delgh-.

indutiae 'armistice, truce' [f pi. a] (Pl.+) ' The noun suggests an adjectival base *duto-. Michael Weiss suggests to me a possible connection with PIE *duh₂- 'to be able, arrange', hence *n-duh₂-tio- 'inability'. This would be interesting in view of the possible derivation of helium from bonus (see s.v.), which also concerns the context of war and battle. Bibl.: WH I: 696, EM 316.

Inferus 'lower' [adj. ο/ά] (Pl.+; Cato nom.sg.m. infer) Derivatives: infen, -drum [m.pl.] 'the inhabitants of the underworld' (Pl.+), inferior 'lower' (PL+); infimus 'lowest' (Pl.+), infu/imatis [adj.] 'of the lowest rank' (PL); infernus 'of the underworld; further down' (Pac.+); infra [adv.; prep.] 'below' (PL+)- Pit. *enpero- 'lower'. It. cognates: Fal. ifra 'beneath' [adv.]. PIE *ndhero- 'lower', *ndhmHo- 'lowest'. IE cognates: GauL anderon [gen.pL] 'gods of the underworld'(?); Skt, adhara-, YAv. aSara- 'lower', ms <'dl> er 'low', YAv. adairi 'below'; Go. undar, OHG untar, untari 'under', Nom.sg. inferus must have restored -us on the basis of the other case forms. According to Giacomelli, the Fal. form confirms that the/in Latin can be a dialectal form. Others (WH, Leumann, Meiser) assume that *c? underwent treatment as if in anlaut because *en- was metanalysed as the preposition 'in' and *-dtero- as a separate

<!-- pdf-page: 317; printed-page-estimate: 303 -->

stem. This view can be supported by suffio (where the primary status of the simplex is clear) and maybe -fariam, where/< *-dh- also occurs word-internally. Bibl.: WH I: 698, EM 317, IEW 771, Giacomelli 1963: 248f, Leumann 1977: 169, 423, Sihler 1995: 69, Meiser 1998: 105. → imus

Infestus 'hostile, aggressive' [adj. o/a] (PL+) Derivatives: manu/ifestus 'caught in the act, plainly guilty; obvious' (Lex XII+), manifestarius 'caught in the act' (PL+). Pit. *en-fristo- 'rushing in'? According to Leumann 1977: 390, manu/ifestus derives from *manu festus with iambic shortening of the first element. If manifestus may be interpreted as 'caught by hand', the meanings seem to point to 'grabbing' or 'attacking' for -festus. The connection with PIE *dhers- 'to be bold' is not very compelling» Latin -fest- may stem from *fast-, -st- may be from -Rst-, -RTst- or -7i/-. Closest in form would be fastigium 'top, summit', fastus 'pride' < *bhrst-, but this yields no sense. The etymology of infestus as 'implacable' < *n-gwhect-to~y still supported by Leumann 1977: 168, is semantically farther off, and phonetically possible only if we assume restoration of *-fo- after dental clusters became ss (unlikely) or if we assume a suffix *-5/o-. If festtnare^ confestim contain a noun *festi- 'hurry' < *fristi-y this would match infestus ('rushing in'), but not so well manifestus/Thus, maybe the two must be separated· 'Λ Bibl.: WH I: 698f., EM 317,385, IEW 259. -^festmo ;

ingens, -entis 'huge, vast, numerous' [adj. nt] (Pl.+) Pit *mgBnt-* PIE *mg-(e)h₂-(e)nt-, IE cognates: Skt mahantam [acc.sg.f.], mahati [f.] 'great, big', YAv. mazant- 'id.' < Ilr. *maj(a)H-ant- < PIE *meg-h₂-nt-. WH's explanation as in-gens 'wovon es kein Entstehen gibt' is incomprehensible to me: it cannot be compared with Skt abhva-, since the latter is endocentric, whereas ingens would have to be exocentric. Muller's proposal (1926) of a derivative in *-nt- to PIE *mg- is more promising. Since a theoretical preform *mg-nt- 'great' would yield Lat *magent~ (cf. magnus < *mg-no-\ we may derive ingens from PIE *mg-hrent- (> *ingant- > ingent-) or *mg-ahr(e)nt- (> *ingant- > *ingant > *ingent-). Thus, the Latin form would have the same two suffixes as Ilr. Bibl.: WH I: 700, EM 317, IEW 373ff., Schrijver 1991: 484. → magnus

inguen, -inis 'swelling on the groin, bubo; groin' [n. n] (Lucil.+) Pit V * W K PIE *ngw-en, -n-os 'the nude one'. IE cognates: Gr. άδήν, -ένος [f., mj 'gland'. Schrijver 1991 and Beekes (fthc.) separate the Greek word from Latin and North-Germanic (OIc. ekkvenn 'thick, clodded', Mole, ekkr [m.] 'glans, gland, tumour' < PGm, *enkua- < IE *engwo-), because Greek cannot have had an initial laryngeal, whereas in meaning, Latin and Gm. are closer to each other. Yet both Greek 'gland' and Latin 'groin' can be explained semantically on the basis of 'naked',

<!-- pdf-page: 318; printed-page-estimate: 304 -->

the meaning of PIE *negw- (see nudus). Hence, we may rather discard the Germanic forms (they primary meaning seems to be 'swelling, ulcer'), and reconstruct a PIE «-stem derived from 'nude\ Bibl.: WH I: 701, EM 317£, IEW 319, Schrijver 1991: 59, Sihler 1995: 162. → midus

inquinO, -are 'to make dirty' [v. I] (Pl.+) Derivatives: coinquinare 'to pollute' (Acc.+); cunire 'to defecate' (Paul, ex F.); ancunulentae 'women having their period' (Paul ex F.\ Pit. *kwina-je/o-, *k"oin-je/o-l The word cannot be connected with caenum; see s.v. Bibl.: WH 1: 131, EM 318, Schrijver 1991: 265. -* caenum, cunio

Insece / inquam 'to say' [v. in\] (Andr.+); pr.ipv. insece, inseque (Andr., Επα), pf. insexit (Enn.) 'to tell'; pr.ind. inquam (Pl.+) Ί say; of course', inquis, -it, -imus, -itis, -iunt 'says' > 'said', ipv. inque, inquito 'say!'; other moods and tenses follow conjugation IIlb (PL+). Derivatives: insectid 'story* (GeL). Pit. pr. *en-sekw-e/o- (?), aor. *en-skw-e/o~. PIE aor. *skw-e/o- 'to follow'. IE cognates: Olr. insce 'discourse' < *en(iyskw-ia, Olr. seichidf, seich* 'to say', OW MW hebu 'to say', MCo. gorthybi 'to answer', OBret. hep 'says* < PCL *sekw-e/o-; Gr. pr. έν(ν)έπω < *en-sekw-; aor ένιοπεΐν, ipv. έσπετε < *έν-σπ-ετε; ένίσσω < *si-sekw-/skw-; Lith. (diaL) sekti, 3s. seka 'to tell'; OIc. segja, OS seggian 'to say' < IE *sokweie-. The shift from 'follow* to 'tell' can be explained via 'repeat, relate'. The forms insece and inseque occur in texts modelled on Greek epic, and might be caiques on έννέπω, using Latin *in-sequd. But they can also be regarded as inherited from the PIE present; the delabialized velar would have been generalized (*inseque » insece). Latin inquam < *en-skw-a- (original ls.sb. Ί will say') and inquit < *en-sk™-e-t9 probably from the PIE (thematized) aorist. To inquit, a complete verbal paradigm was then built. The disappearance of *s in *en-skw- is difficult to account for, but must be accepted. The only possible parallel is tranquillus, but its etymology is uncertain. Much more problematic is the assumption of a reduplication present *en-si-skw-e- (Hackstein 1997: 37-42), since this would in addition require syncope in a closed syllable. Bibl.: WH 1: 702f, EM 318, IEW 897f, Leumann 1977: 212, 531, Sihler 1995: 5461, Meiser 1998:117,214, Meiser 2003: 147, Schumacher 2004:565f, LIV 2 *sek-. — sequor

TnsolSsco, -ere 'to become overbearing' [v. Ill] (Sall.+) Derivatives: insolens, -ntis 'unaccustomed, unfamiliar' (Ter.+), 'immoderate, haughty' (Cic.+), Insolentia 'unfamiliarity' (Turp.+), 'extravagance, arrogance' (Cic.+). The older etymology says that these words are derived from soled 'to be accustomed1, via a semantic shift from 4to be unaccustomed1 to 'be out of the ordinary, exaggerated'. This is actually supported by the chronology of the meanings of Insolens and Insolentia. The pr, Insolesco would then be a more recent derivative

<!-- pdf-page: 319; printed-page-estimate: 305 -->

from Tnsolens (Sall.+). Another etymology, first proposed by Prokrovskii in 1898, separates insolesco from soled, and connects it with IE verbs for 'to swelP such as German schwellen, whence with a frequently observed semantic shift 'to brag\ Meichert 2005 has taken up this proposal, connecting Insolesco with Hit. sulle-fsulla- 'to become arrogant', sullatar 'swollenness; wantonness' < PIE *suIH-ehr 'to be(come) swollen'. Similarly LIV, To my mind, the inner-Latin chronology of the meanings points to the derivation from soled, Bibl.: WH I: 704, EM 318£, LIV ?*suelH-. → soled

Instar * counterpart, the equivalent' [n. only as nom. or ace] (Varro+) It is tempting to see in instar a derivative of *in-stare [inf.] 'to stand in' > 'balance' (WH), but the use of an inf. as a n. noun is not ancient in Latin. Also, the apocope of -e is unusual (even if it might be regular originally). Finally, the semantic motivation is weak: instar + gen. simply means 'the equivalent oF whereas instare means 'to assail, take a stand'. The origin would have to lie in an earlier period, when in + stare meant 'to stand in\ One might think of an original cp. *(hje)n-stehros 'the standing in' > *in-stas 'the cost' vel sim. Compare iubar for the phonetics of -or. Bibl.: WH I: 705, EM 319. -> sto

instauro, -Sre 'to repeat, restore' [v. I] (Cic.+) Derivatives: restaurdre cto restore, rebuild' (Tac.+). Pit *stauro- 'big, strong'. Λ ■ PIE *sth₂u-ro- ( » *steh₂u-ro-) 'big, strong5. IE cognates: Skt. sthura-, Υ Αν. °stura- [part of names] 'big, strong', Oss. styr/(i)stur4 id.'; OSw. stur, MLG stur cbig, strong, coarse'. If the word is inherited, the composition of in + staurare must be recent, otherwise we would expect *insturare. According to EM, restaurdre replaced mstaurare because the meaning 're-' is unusual for in-. A nominal form *stauro- could reflect PIE *steh₂u-ro-, which reminds us of Skt. sthiira- 'big, strong' < *stuh₂-ro- < *sth₂-u-n>, to the root *steh₂- 'to stand'. Thus, pre-Latin *stauro- would have meant 'strong, big\ from which 'to restore' is easier to understand than from words for 'pole, staff adduced by WH (Gr. σταυρός, OIc. staurr\ The full grade can be due to influence from the verb. Bibl.: WH I: 705f., EM 319, IEW 1004ft -> sto

InstTgflre 'to incite, provoke' [v. I] (Ter.+) Pit. *steig-(e/o-). PIE *steig- 'to prick, sting'. IE cognates: Skt. ati stigh- 'to overcome', ά-stig- 'to harm, penetrate, assail', stega- [m.] 'which stings / cane', YAv, stija [ins.sg.] 'with the tip (of the tusk)', Skt. tejate [pr.med.], tetikte [3s.med.int] 'to sharpen', fiksna- [adj.] 'sharp, keen-eyed', tejas- [n.] 'sharp edge (of knife), sharpness', YAv. bi-taeya- 'having two sharp edges', brdWrdJaeza- 'sharp due to the blade', tiyra- 'cutting, pointed, sharp' (in cp. tizi-), Gr. σχίζω 'to sting, tattoo', στίγμα [η.] 'stab, brand'; NHG stechen 'to sting', Distel 'thistle' (< PGm. *pihstila-).

<!-- pdf-page: 320; printed-page-estimate: 306 -->

Probably a denominal verb to *steig-(o~) *sharp point', or a Latin compound verb in -are derived from an earlier present *st!ge/o- < *steig-(e/o-). Bibl.: WH I: 706£, EM 649, IEW 1016f., Cheung 2007: 361f., Lubotsky (fthc.), LIV *(s)teig-, → stingud

Insula island' [f. a] (Naev.+) IE cognates: Olr. wis, W. ynys 'island' < *ine/issT-9 Gn νήσος [f.] 'island', Dor. νασος, Rhod νασσος. The etymology as *en-sal-o- 'what is in the salt(y)' > 'in the sea5 > 'island' is theoretically possible as far as the phonetics go, but being 'in the sea' is not a very precise description of what an island is; furthermore, the Indo-Europeans seem to have indicated with 'island5 mainly 'river islands'. One might connect Lat solum 'soil, ground', but a formation *en-sol-hr with a preverb would be hard to explain. Since no other etymology is obvious, it may well be a loanword from an unknown language. The same language may be the source for the Celtic and Greek words, which also contain η and s. Bibl.: WH I: 707, EM 319, IEW 878f.

inter 'among, between' [prep.] (Andr.+) Derivatives: interior 'inner, internal' (Ter.+), intra [prep., adv.] 'within, inside' (Pl.+), intm [adv.] «inside' (PL+); intrare 'to enter' (PL+); interatim «interim' (P1-+), interea(d) 'in the meantime5 (Andr.+), interim 'meanwhile5 (PL+); intimus 'inmost, closest5 (PL+). Pit. *nter 'between', *ntero- «interior5, *ntamo-» It. cognates: Ven. a(n)tra 'within'; O. anter prep. + ace. 'between', + abl. 'within'; as preverb (λ anter-, ander-, U. anter-; *nter 'between'. PIE *hi(e)nter [adv.] 'between', *hi(e)n-tero- 'situated within', *hi(e)n-tmHo- 'innermost'. IE cognates: Olr. eter, OW ithr, Co. ynter, yntre, Bret, etre 'between5 < PCI. *enter9 Skt antar, OAv. antardy YAv. antar3 'between, within' < *enter9 Skt. anfara-, YAv. antara- 'interior' < *entero~; Skt. antama-, YAv. cmtema-'most intimate'; Gr. έντερα [piJ 'intestines', Arm. 9nderk\ RuCSjatro 'liver, (pi.) entrails', SCr. jetra 'liver' < PS1. *j?tro < *hien-tr-om; OIc. idrar [pi.] 'intestines' < PGm. *enperdz, Go. undaurni-mat 'midday meal', OIc. undorn 'before midday5, OHG untorn 'midday5 < *npurna- < *ntrno~9 OE OS undern 'before midday5 < *nterno-9 Go. undar, OHG untar 'between' < PGm. *unber < *nter; OPr. instran 'fat' < *n-s~tro-9 Lith. jscios [f.pl.] 'womb, entrails, interior', Latv. ieksas 'entrails5 < *n-s-tio-. Lat. inter continues the PIE locatival adverb derived from *hien 'in5. The adj. in *-tero~ is continued in the original abl.sg. forms intra and intrd, and in inter-ion The sup. intimus is also inherited from PIE. The n. of ^en-tero- was apparently lexicalised to 'entrails' in PIE already. Bibl.: WH I: 708-712, EM 312f, IEW 311-314, Lejeune 1974: 331, Leumann 1977: 316, Meiser 1986: 69, Schxijver 1991: 59, Untermann 2000: 108f., Schaffiier 2006b: 157f. → in, intestmus

<!-- pdf-page: 321; printed-page-estimate: 307 -->

interpres, -tis intermediary, agent' [m. /] (PL+) Derivatives: interpretari 'to explain, interpret' (PL+), interpretatio 'explanation' (Varro+). Pit *-pore-t- 'who crosses', PIE *por-o- 'crossing'? IE cognates: Gr. πόρος [m.] passage, ford, road; means', άπορος 'with no way out, impassable'; see s.v. porto. WH propose that interpres is a backformation to interpretari, which would mean 'to determine the mutual value' to pretium. Yet in that case, one would expect *interpretiaru A root *preU has been proposed for Go.frapjan and Lith, prasti 'to understand', but 'understanding' is a secondary meaning of the Latin forms. Forms such as super-stes to stare bring Nussbaum 2004b to the following analysis: the second member contains a /-stem derivative to the IE root *per- 'to come over, cross\ Hence: *enter-poro- 'going between' » *enter-pore-U 'who goes between', then syncope nom.sg. *enterporess > *enterpress > interpres. A thematized compound *enter-pr-o- may also be envisaged. Bibl.: WH I: 710f, EM 320, LIV l.*per-. -oporto\pretium

intestfnus 'internal, civic, domestic' [adj. o/a\ (Varro+) Derivatives: intestvnum 'intestines, guts' (PL+), 'alimentary canal' (Lucr.+). Pit. *nter-sto- 'internal'. The meaning 'intestines' in the earlier attested intestfnum, and the meaning 'domestic' of the later adj., suggest that we are deajing with an adj. originally meaning 'internal'. WH seem to assume a derivative in *-ft"o- to PIE *entos 'inside', which is possible, but not the best solution. Leumann 1977 reconstructs *inter-stmo- with regular development of *-rst- to -sf-, referring to Forssman 1965. This would mean that interstes has restored r, which is unproblematic. The suffix can be reconstructed as *-stlno-, which Forssman regards as the noun *^sth₂-i- plus the suffix *-HO-. Maybe more likely is *-sth₂-o- (based on compounds in *-steh₂- as in Ilr.) with subsequent replacement of the suffix *-o- by *-ϊηο-. Bibl.: WH I: 712, EM 313f., IEW 311-314, Leumann 1977: 327. → inter, sto \ invito, -are 'to entertain, invite' [v. I] (Pl.+) Pit *wita~je/o- 'to pursue', PIE *uihrto- 'pursued'. IE cognates: see invitus. We may posit a derived verb *witqje- 'to pursue', prefixed with in- 'in'. Job 1999 proposes to derive invitare from *in-wiwitare < *en-uegyvh-i/eta-, a frequentative of the root of voved. Yet the frequentatives are normally built on the ppp., but votus < *uoueto- shows o-vocalism. Bibl.: WH I: 713f, EM 321, IEW 1123f., Schrijver 1991: 231, LIV *udhr. -> invSus

invitus 'unwilling' [adj. o/a] (Pl>) Pit *n-wito- 'unwilling'. PIE *n-uih₁-to- cnot turned to, not pursuing'. IE cognates: Skt. viyanti [3p.act.J 'they pursue', vita- 'turned to', YAv. viia- 'to pursue', vitar- [m.] 'pursuer'; Gr. ΐεμαι 'to

<!-- pdf-page: 322; printed-page-estimate: 308 -->

strive after, wish₁; Lith. vyti 'to drive, pursue*. Bibl.: WH I: 713f., EM 321, IEW 1123f., Schrijver 1991: 231, Sihler 1995: 540, LYV *ueihr. —> invito, via, vis

iocus 'joke, jest' [m. ο] (Pl.+; also ioca, -drum [n.pl.]) Derivatives: iocan 'to jest, joke' (PL+), iocosus 'fond of jokes, funny' (Varro+), iocularis [adj.] 'laughable' (Ter.+), iocularius 'id.' (Ten), ioculus 'joke' (PL). Pit *joko-. It. cognates: U. iuka, iuku [acc.pl.] 'words1 or 'prayers' < *iok-o-, PaeL iocatin [3p.pf. ] maybe 'to order, command', denom. to *ioko-. PIE *iok-o- 'word, utterance1, IE cognates: MW ieith, W. iaith, Bret, yezh 'language', Mir., Molr. icht 'people' < PCL *iextV-; OHG jehan, OS gehon 'to express, utter', OHG jiht 'confession1. Lith. juokas 'laugh, laughter, (pi.) joke(s)', Latv.ywofc 'joke' are probably borrowings from German. Bibl.: WH I: 715f, EM 322, IEW 503f, Schrijver 1995: 106f., Untermann 2000: 350f., LIV *iek-.

ipse, ipsa, ipsum 'himself, herself, itself [pron. adj.] (Lex XII, Andr.+; nom.sg.m. ipsus Andr. to Cato) Derivatives: ipsissimus 'the very same' (PL+). Pit. *so-pe-so » *e(s)-pe-so. It. cognates: O. essuf, esuf, U. esuf [pron.] '(he) himself or 'there7, maybe < *eps(o) + -on-s. PIE *soso 'that'. The oldest forms are compounds of inflected is, es, id + -pse, probably < *-pe-so, with the PIE pronoun *so: eapse, eumpse, eampse, eapse. Some forms have double inflection in Plautus and other OLat. authors: eumpsum, eapso; but Jimenez Zamudio 1989: 120 argues that these forms are erroneous spellings for eumpse, eopse. There are also a few isolated forms with *so- in both members: nom.sg.f sapsa (Enn.Pac), accsg.m. sumpse (PL). Meiser regards -p- as an anaptyctic consonant between two m's in the acc.sg. {*sumsum, *samsam), but it may have been the particle *-pe: *so-pe-so, etc. In that way, the Sabellic forms can be connected more easily. Thus, we may posit the following chronology: PIE *soso 'this' (cf Lat. -so) was replaced in Pit. by *so-pe-so (> Lat. sapsa) and *e(s)-pe-so (> *ispse, eapse, eumpse etc.). Both members of this reduplicated pronoun were originally inflected. In the nom.sg.m., final *-so gave Lat. ~sey medial *-e- was syncopated (as it was in Sab.) and initial i- was not recognized as a pronoun anymore. Final -se seems to have been generalised in the pronouns attested in Plautus, but it is doubtful whether this happened in the whole language. In post-Plautine Latin, initial i- spread to the other forms of the pronoun, and the inflection was restricted to the ending of the word: ipse, ipsa, ipsum. Bibl.: WH I: 716f., EM 322f, IEW 281-286, Leumann 1977: 471, Jimenez Zamudio 1989, Sihler 1995: 394f., Meiser 1998: 163f, Untermann 2000: 235f. -* is, *pe, -so

Tra 'anger, rage' [f. a] (Naev.+; PL <eira>) Derivatives: iracundus 'irascible' (PL+), Tracundia 'hot temper, passion' (PL+);

<!-- pdf-page: 323; printed-page-estimate: 309 -->

irascl 'to be(come) angry' (Pl.+), iratus 'angry1 (Pfi+). Pit *eis/ra-. PIE *hieis-h₂- 'anger'. IE cognates: Av. aesma- 'wrath5, Gr. οιμα 'spring, rush' < *hiois-mo-; Skt. is- 'refreshment strength', ToB aise 'power5. The spelling eira is found in a word-play with era 'mistress', which might point to an (archaic) pronunciation [e:ra] of the word 'anger'. In that case, the word must contain Pit. *ei. The suffix -cundus is rare, but cannot be original in iracundus; it must have been adopted from other adj. in -cundus. The adj. iratus was formed directly from Tra; the verb irascl, on the other hand, cannot be derived from the noun, and must be a back-formation to iratus. It is uncertain that ira contains intervocalic *-s-9 and also the semantic connection between the surmised PIE root *hiis- 'to urge5 and words for 'anger5 is hardly compelling. Thus, I accept this etymology in the absence of a better one. Bibl·: WH I: 717f, EM 323, IEW 299-301, Leumann 1977: 63fi, 333, Schrijver 1991: 37, Meiser 1998: 58, LIV *hieish₂-.

irrTtO, -are 'to provoke, annoy, excite' [v. I] (PL+) Pit *rito- 'stirred1. PIE *h₃riH-to- 'whirled, stirred\ IE cognates: Mir. nan 'river, sea5; Skt. rlyate 'to flow (producing whirlpools),.whirl5, rinati 'to make»flow, make run5; Gr. όρϊνω, Lesb. όρίννω 'to whirl'; Ru. rejat' 'to stream fast, flow-5, rinut' 'to stream, flow5; OE rid 'stream, brook', OHG rinnan 'to drip'. f Probably, a denominal verb from *rffo- 'stirred'. A frequentative would be possible only if we assume haplology from *ntitare. Bibl.: WH I: 718f, EM 323, IEW 326-332, Schrijver 1991: 24, LIV *h₃reiH-. → rims

is, ea, id 'this, that' [pron. adj.] (Lex XII, Andr.+); sg. nom.m. is (lx eis)9 acc.m. im9 em (Lex ΧΠ) » eum, nomacan. id, gen.m.n.f. eius (= eiius), dat.m.n. *eiiei > ei > ei9 abl.m.n. eod > eo, nom.f. eay acc.fi earn, dat.fi eae » ei, abLf. ead > ea; pi. nom.m. eeis (CIL), e/, els (PI.) > «, &, acc.m. eos, nom,acc.n. ea> gen.m.n. eum (Paul. ex F,, CIL) »edrum9 dat.abl.m.n. eieis (CIL) > /&, » ibus (PL+), nom.fi eae, acc.f. eas, gen.f earum, dat.abl.fi eis (PI.) > i&, » eabus (Cato) Derivatives: ea 'along that path' (Cato+), eo 'thither' (Cato+), 'therefore' (PL+), ideo 'for the reason (that)1 (Pl.+). Pit nom.sg.m. *iy, acc.sg.m. *im9 nom.acc.sg.n. *id; f. *ejo/a- in nom.sg.fi, acc.sg.f, *esm- in dat.loc.sg.m.n. It. cognates: O. izic, U. erek, ere, erec> ere [nom.sg.m.], CX iuk, iiuk, ioc [nom.sg.fi], ionc, U. eu [acc.sg.m.], O. Iak, U. earn [acc.sg.f.], O. idik, idik, idic, U. efek [nom.acc.sg.n.], O. eiseis, elseis, eizeis, U. ererek, erer9 irer [gen.sg.m.n.], erar [gen.sg.fi], esmik, SPic. esmik [dat.sg.m.n.], O. eisud, eis[ud] , eizuc, eizucen, U. eruku, erucom (+ -com) [abl.sg.m.n.], O. eisak, U. erak [abl.sg.fi], O. elsei, esei, eizeic [loc.sg.m.n.], SPic. esmen, esmin [idem + -en] , (X ejisai [loc.sg.fi], ivsc [nom.pl.m.], eisiuss [acc.pl.m.?], U. eaf, eaf9 Marr. iafc [acc.pl.fi], O. ioc, U. eu, eo [nom.acc.pl.n.], O. eisunc, Marr. esuc„ U. em, erom, ero [gen.pl.m.n.], O. eizazunc [gen.pl.fi], eizois [dat.abl.pl.m.n.], eizasc [dat.abl.pl.fi]

<!-- pdf-page: 324; printed-page-estimate: 310 -->

'this* < stems */-, *ςιο-, *eiso-, *esmo- with or withour particle *-te: *i- in nom.sg.m., nom.acc.sg.n; *ejo- in nom.sg,f., acc.sg.pLf.; *esm- in dat.loc.sg.m.n.; *eiso- in remaining case forms. Nonp.acc.sg.n. *id-id-k(e), the second syllable of which spread to the nom.sg.m. and sometimes gen.sg. PIE *(h])i- [nom.acc.sg. m.f.n.], *h₁e-sm-/-si-/-i- (elsewhere) 'he, she, it*. IE cognates: Olr. e (he) 'he' < *e(i)s or *em, ed(hed) 'it', si 'she', gen.sg.m.n. ai, ae 'his (one)\ MW eid-aw 'his' < *esio; Gaul, eiabi [ins.pl.f], eianom [gen.pl.f] < *e(s)ia-\ Hit. asi / uni / ini 'that (one)' < *hios + -i, •hjom + i (hio- « ^ e - according to Kloekhorst 2008), *hii-, datloc.sg. edi < *h₁e-; Skt iyam [nom.sg.f ], idam [nom.acc.sg.n.], imam [acc.sg.m.] 'this here, he', OAv. it [nom.acc.sg.n.], YAv. Jm [nom.sg.f], imsm [acc.sg.m.], OP iyam [nom.sg.m.f.] < *h₁i-; Skt. ayam [nom.sg.m.], asmai [dat.sg.m./n.], asmat [abl.sg.m./n.], asyo [gen.sg.m./n.] 'this here, he', Av. aem [nom*sg.m.], OAv. aiism [nom.sg.m.], ahmai [dat.sg.rn.], ahmat [abl.sg.m.]; ahiia, axiiaca [gen.sg.m./n.], YAv. ahe [gen.sg.m7n.] < PIE *h₁e-; Gr. (Cypr.) xv 'eum, earn', Gr. μίν, νίν; Lith.jis *he\ji 'she', OCS ϊ 'that, he, who',ya 'she',ye 'it' < PIE *(h])i-(o)-; Go. is 'he', acc.sg. ina, n. ita9 acc.sg.f. ija, OHG er, ir [nom.sg.m.]. In Latin, the stem */- survives in is, id, and archaic /m, em, whereas *ei- from the plural and from gen.sg. has become the basis for the other case forms. Beekes (1995: 203) explains nom.sg.m. is < *es, with unstressed development of the voweL This is possible, but not compelling. Gen.sg. *esjo[s] has been used as a new stem for the whole pronoun. The gen. eiius itself is difficult to explain. In Sabellic, we find remains of PIE *e-sm- in the oblique case forms, the partial spread of *eis- and also of * ejo-. Bibl.: Sommer 1914: 417-420, WH I: 399f.f 720f., EM 323f., IEW 281-286, Leumann 1977: 466f, Sihler 1995: 391f., van der Staaij 1995: 112-123, Schrijver 1997b: 51-70, Meiser 1998: 159-161, Unteimann 2000: 355-358. → -ce, -de, -dem, ibi, idem, ipse, iste, ita

iste, ista, istud 'that of yours' [pron., pron. adj.] (Naev.+); gen.sg. istius, dat.sg. isti, but Pl.Cato also gen.sg.m. isti^ datsg.f. istae Derivatives: istic, -aec, -uc [pron. adj.] 'that of yours' (Pl.+); isiic 'over there' (PL+), istinc 'from over there' (Pl.+), isto (Pl+), istoc (Pl.+), istuc (Pl.+) 'to where you are', istorsum 'in your direction' (Ten). Pit *es-to-. It. cognates: U. estu [acc.sg.m.], Presam. estam [acc.sg.f.], U. este, este [acc.sg.n.], SPic. estas [nom.pl.f.?], U. estu, esto, estac [acc.pl.n.] 'this' < *i/es-to-; n. *es-ti-d. IE cognates: see s.v. is and so-. Latin iste and Sab. *esto- may go back to the same preform *es-to- if Latin has replaced *es- by is-. The first element might be the same *es- found in the oblique case forms of *e-//-, dat. *esmoi, etc. The second element can be identied with the PIE pronoun *so-/*to- (see Lat. so-). The asigmatic nom.sg.m. *so was apparently replaced (maybe already in Italo-Celtic) by *fo. It has been proposed that, alternatively, this may have been the uninfected particle *-te, but since all Italic

<!-- pdf-page: 325; printed-page-estimate: 311 -->

languages show inflection (unlike with *-ke), this seems less likely. Bibh: WH I: 72Ifi, EM 324, IEW 281-286, Leumann 1977: 470, van der Staaij 1995: 137, Sihler 1995:394, Meiser 1998: 163, Untennann 2000: 236f. → is, so-

ita 'in the same way as, thus' [adv.] (Lex XII+) Derivatives: itaque 'in consequence, so' (PI.+), item 'in the same way' (P1-+), itidem 'in the same way' (Ph+). Pit *i-to-. It cognates: U. itek [adv.] 'thus, as said' < *itei + -k(e) . Itidem < *ita-dim. Theoretically, ita may represent *ito with iambic shortening, but item and itidem cannot have *ita. When we compare Skt iti 'in this manner', Lith. it [adv.] 'just like, in a manner of speaking' < *hiiti (?), Skt ittha, itthad 'here, there', Av. ipa 'thus', Lat ita could reflect PIE *hiith₂. Alternatively, we may compare -ta with the second element of is-te, and regard it as the original nom.acc.pl.n. *teh₂ 'those', which acquired short *-a as the other neuters, and was used as ace. of extension: 'in this respect' > 'in this way\ In origin, then, ita could go back to a compound pronoun from PIE *hji 'it' and *to- 'that'. Bibl.: WH I: 722fi, EM 324, IEW 281-286, Leumann 1977: 92, Schrijver 1991: 80, Untermann 2000: 349f → is, iste

iter, itineris journey, route, road' [n. r/n] (Naev.+; variants: nom.acc.sg. itiner PI.+, gen,sg. iteris Naev.+, abl.sg. iter§ Acc.+) Pit *eitor, *iten(o)sl j PEE *hiei-tr, gen.sg. *hji-ten-s, loc.sg. *h|i-ten 'way, journey'. IE cognates: Hit itar [n.] 'way' (< *hlei-tr, ^i-ten-s? cf Rieken 1999: 374-377); YAvrpairiuna- 'due lifetime' (< Pllr. *pari-itna- < PIE *hjit-n-o-)'9 ToB ytarye 'road, way', ToA ytar 'road, way' < *hii-tor. The nom.sg. in -er seems to point to *-er, which would be unique. Lat *}aser! 'blood' (if this is the right reconstruction) would be the only other r/n-stem in -er, but its IE cognates point to a proterodynamic neuter. For iter, Tocharian seems to continue a collective in *-qr, but Hittite -t- /d/ may be best explained by assuming an original PD paradigm. For Li&tin, one could assume that the nom.acc.sg. iter replaces earlier *itur < *itor « *h₁ei-tr, Klingenschmitt and Meiser assume a paradigm with nom.sg. *h$i-tir, gen,sg. *hji-tn-es, which would be unique for a n. noun. The loc.sg. *hIi-ten which Meiser 1998 assumes to have served as the basis for itin-eris, is consistent with either kind of paradigm. The syllable *-en- can be the source for the analogical -e- in the nom.acc. iter. Willi 2004: 326 assumes that the oblique ending -neris was adopted as such from the neuter abstracts in -nus, -neris such as facinus 'crime'. Obviously, there is no perfect model for such a replacement, but it seems the best explanation for itineris so far. Bib!.: WH I: 408, EM 197, IEW 294f, Klingenschmitt 1992: 18, Meiser 1998: 142, LIV *hirih. → eo

iterum 'again, for the second time' [adv.] (Pl.+) Derivatives: iterare 'to repeat' (PL+).

<!-- pdf-page: 326; printed-page-estimate: 312 -->

Pit. *iiero- 'the other1. PIE *(h₁)i-tero-. IE cognates: Skt. itara- 'the other (of the two), another'. Bibl.: WH I: 723f, EM 325, IEW 281«-286, Sihler 1995: 429. ^ ceterus, is

iuba 'mane; plume' [f. a] (Enn.+) Derivatives: iubatus 'having a mane' (Naev*+). Pit. *jupa-. PIE *(H)iudh-h₂- 'that moves, moveables'. WH assume that iuba was derived from the root of iubere as 'moving to and fro', Leumann 1977 'shaking5. This is rejected by EM, but since a better etymology is absent, we may accept it for the time being: *iub-a 'that moves (to and fro)' > 'mane, plume'. Bibl.: WH I: 724, EM 325, IEW 51 If., Leumann 1977: 279, LIV *Hieudh-. → iubeo

iubar, -aris 'the first light of day; brightness1 [n. r] (Enn.+; lx iubar Enn.) Pit. *dju-faos, dju-Jas-, PIE *diu-bheh₂-es- 'having/bringing the light of daytime'. IE cognates: Olr. ban 'white'; Skt. bhas- [n.] 'light, radiance, gleam, glow' < *bheh₂-s-, bhasas- [n.] 'splendour', maybe HLuw. pihas- 'splendor, might' < *bheh₂-o-\ Skt. bhati, YAv. fra-uuaiti 'to shine'; Gr. φάε 'lighted up, appeared', φαίνω 'to shine, reveal'. The -a- in gen.sg. iubaris must have been adopted from the nom.acc.sg.; conversely, the -r~ in the nom.acc.sg. must have originated in the oblique case forms. Dunkel 1997 summarizes the earlier proposals to see in iubar a compound of *diu- with the root *bheh₂-, and gives a convincing etymological analysis. Since it is a n. noun, the original cp. iubar must originally have been an epithet to a n. head noun, but which one is uncertain. Bibl.: WH I: 724, EM 325, IEW 104, 184-87, Leumann 1977: 84, Dunkel 1997, LIV 1 .*bheh₂-. —> deus, Iupiter

iubeo 'to order' [v. II; pf. iussi, ppp. iussum; SCBac. ioub-, ious-] (Andr.+) Derivatives: iussus, -Us 'bidding, command' (Pl.+), iniussu [adv.] 'without orders' (Cato+). Pit. *joup-eje/o-. PIE *Hioudh-eie/o- 'to cause to move'. IE cognates: Skt. pr. yudhya- 'to fight', yodha- 'to rebel', caus. yodhayati, ppp. yuddha- 'conquered', yudh- [fj 'fight', YAv. yuioiia- 'to fight', aspaiiaoSa- [m.j 'horse warrior'; Gr. ύσμΐνη (< Gr. *husmo-) [f.] 'battle, fight1; LiOLfitdus 'belligerent'; Lith.jud&i 'to move (intr.)'; ToA yutk- 'to care for' < *ieuct-ske-. The oldest pr. form ioub- matches the reconstructed PIE causative type. It has been replaced by iub- on the model of the short vowel in the pf. and ppp. The pf. ious- has been replaced by ius- on the model of the ppp.; but OLat ious- itself must be secondary for *iup-s-, the expected ^-perfect to a secondary verb stem. The Latin meaning has developed from 'to cause to move' > 'order\ Bibl.: WH I: 724f., EM 325, IEW 51 If., Meiser 1998: 209, LIV *Hieudh-,

<!-- pdf-page: 327; printed-page-estimate: 313 -->

iabilfi, -Sre 'to let out whoops' [v. I] (Varro+) Derivatives: iiigere 'to utter its natural cry': milvi dicuntur cum vocem emittunl (Paul, ex F.). Pit. */w. PIE */w. IE cognates: Gn ίύ 'interjection of amazement', ΐΰγή, ιυγμός 'crying', ιυζω (fut ιύξω) 4to cry aloud'; MHGju,juch 'exclamation of joy' whence MHGjuwen, juwezen 4ju rufen, jube\n\juchezen, MoDu.juichen < ^'ϋ(χ)αη, OIc. yla^ MoE yowl 4to howl' < *juljan. Probably, a derivative in -bilare (as in sTbilare 'to whistle') from an exclamation of joy *w. There seems to be enough evidence to reconstruct a PIE exclamation */w, even though this is obviously an onomatopoeia. Bibl.: WH I: 725f., EM 326, IEW 514, Schrijver 1991: 75. → sTbilare

iugis 'constant, continuous' [adj. i] (PL+) Pit. *j(o)u-gi~. PIE *h₂iu-gwih₃- 'having eternal life, living forever'. IE cognates: A v. yauuaeji- 4living forever'; Gr. υγιής 'sound, healthy'; Go. ajukdups 4eternity' < *aiuki-dupi-> OE ece9 cece 'eternal' < *aiuki-. Usually used of waters ('everf lowing'). Traditionally, iugis is regarded as a derivative of iugum 4yoke', in the sense ?connected to each other':. This etymology was rejected by Weiss 1994, since the meaning points rather to 'continually' from the start, and long -u-r is' difficult to explain from iugum. Weiss proposes an etymology as 'having eternal life*, a combination found in other IE languages as a compound *h₂iu-gwih₃-. Weiss assumes that *gw was delabialized in PIE after *w (which is conceivable), and that the final *-f which should have resulted from *-iH- was reintegrated as a short i-stem, since Latin had no long Γ-stems. The long u instead of u he explains from the introduction of the full grade *(H)ieu- on the basis of the putative comp. and sup. containing such a full grade. Alternatively, one could derive the full grade from the paradigm of the noun *h₂i-u-, as found in Av. aiiu, gen. yaos < *Hoi-u-, gen.sg* *Hi-eu-s. ^ Bibl.: WH I: 727, EM 327, IEW 508-510, Weiss 1995. → iSs, iuvenis

iuncus 'reed, rush' [m. o] (PL+) Derivatives: iunceus OfTlike rushes' (Pl.+), iuncetum 'bed of rushes' (Varro); eiuncidus 'soft like a rush' (Varro+); mnipe/irus9 -F[f.] 'juniper-berry; juniper-tree' (Cato+), Pit. *joiniko-, IE cognates: Mir. ain 'reeds, rushes' (< Olr. *oin < */o/«/-); OIc. einir, Swed. en 'juniper' if from *jainia-. According to WH, iuncus derives from *ioini- by means of the common ko-suffix. It developed from *ioiniko- > *ioinko- > *iunko- > iuncus. The stem *ioi-ni- gives the impression of being non-IE. If iuniperus was derived from the same stem, we must explain why syncope took place in iuncus but not in iuniperus. One would expect the reverse, if anything: retention in *ioiniko-, syncope in *ioiniipVro-. Bibl.: WH I: 729f., EM 328, IEW 513.

<!-- pdf-page: 328; printed-page-estimate: 314 -->

iungfi, -ere 'to put in the yoke Join' [v. 111] (Pl.+; ίϋηχϊ, iiinctum) Derivatives: (1) adiungere 'to join, combine, attach' (Pl.+), coniungere 'to connect' (PL+), coniunctio 'joining, union' (Vauro+X coniugulus [adj.] 'name of a species of myrtle* (Cato+), deiungere 'to unyoke' (Varro+), di(s)iungere 'to separate, unyoke' (PL+), seiungere 'to separate, exclude' (Lucr.+), subiungere 'to harness, attach' (Varro+); iunctus, -us Rejoining' (Varro); (2) coniu(n)x, -gis 'husband, wife' (Pl.+), coniugium 'marriage' (Ter.+), coniugalis 'marital' (Varro+); seiugis [adj.] 'separate' (Paul, ex F.); iniuges 'boves qui sub iugo non fuerint' (Paul, ex F.)\ (3) iugus [adj.] Combined together' (Cato+), btgae [f pi.] 4pair of horses' (Enn.+), biiugus 'yoked in pairs* (Lucr.+), quadriiugus 'drawn by four horses' (Enn.+), quadriga 'a chariot with its team of four horses' (PL+), quadrigarius 'charioteer' (Varro+); (4) iugera^ -um [n.pl.] 'a measure of land' (Cato+; sg. iugerum Varro+); (5) iugum 'yoke' (Pl.+), lora subiugia 'yoke-straps' (Cato+); iugare 'to fasten' (Laev.+), iugatid 'the training of vines along crossbeams' (Varro+), abiugare 'to separate' (Pac.), adiugare 'to attach' (Pac.+), deiugare 'to disconnect' (Pac); (6) iugulum (also -us) 'throat' (Pl.+), iugulae [f.plj 'name for part of the constellation of Orion' (P1-+), iugulare 'to kill by cutting the throat' (PL+); (7) iuges, -etis [adj.] 'relating to yoked animals' (said of auspicium) (Cic, Paul, ex F,); (8) iumentum 'beast of burden* (Pl.+; Forum cippus iouxmenta\ adiumentum 'assistance' (PL+); (9) iug(u)mentum 'lintel' (Cato+). Pit. *jung-e/o-9 *-jug-, *jug-o-, *joug-es-, *joug-s-mn-to-. PIE *(H)iunegti, *(H)iungenti 'to yoke'; *(H)iugo- [n.] 'yoke', *(H)ieug-os- [nj 'yoked animals, team'. IE cognates: (1) Skt. pr. yunajmi [Is.], yuhkte [3s.med] 'to yoke', YAv.yunjinti [3p.pn], Gr. ζεύγνυμι, Lith. jungti, 3s. jungia 'to tie, join, yoke', Latv. jugt. (2) Hit iuk-y (GI )iuka- [n.] 'yoke, pair* < *ieug-, *iugo-, Hit iuga- 'yearling', taiuga- 'two-year-old' < *iugos, gen.sg. of iuk-. Since Hit. iuk- was only thematized to iuka- within the Hittite period, the other IE words that reflect *iugom might be due to a post-IE thematization (Rieken 1999: 61 f.). Skt. yuj- [m.] 'yoke-fellow, ally, associate', Gr. δζυξ 'not yoked' (4) Gr. ζεύγος [η.] 'team', άζυγής 'unbound', MHG jiuch [n.] 'a morgen of land', OHG jiihhart 'a measure of land', Go. jukuzi [f ] 'yoke, servitude', OE gycer 'yoke' (< *jukizi-) (5) Olr. cuing [£] 'yoke' (< *kom-jung-i); OW iou 'yoke', MW iau, yeu9 Co. ieu, Bret, yeu, ieo < PCI. *jugo-\ Skt yuga- [n.] 'yoke, team, race, tribe', pra-uga- (< *pra-yuga-) [n.] 'the fore part of the shafts of a chariot', YAv. yuiid.sBml (< *yugo.s-) [nom.du.] 'yoke and (wooden) pin', MP fuy, MoP firy, Gr. ζυγόν, Arm. lowc, Lith. jimgas, Latv. jugs, OCS igo, Ru. igo 'yoke' < PSI. *jtgo; Go. juk 'pair', OHGyoA, OIc. ok 'yoke'; (8) Gr. ζευγμα 'what is used for joining, bridge of boats, canal-lock'.

(1): PIE nasal present */w->7-g-, thematicized in Latin; (2) prepositional compounds with the root *iug-\ (3) ostem derivative *iug-o- 'yoked', with numerals *dui-iug-o- etc.; (4) 5-steni PIE *ieug-e/os- 'yoked animals, team'; in Latin, it shifted to indicate the amount of land which a team of oxen could plough in a day; (5) PIE n. o-stem 'yoke', with derived verbs; (6) probably 'small yoke', 'connecting part' > 'throat'; (7) the r-stem is uncertain; the attested form iuges might also belong to the adj. iugis (cf 2); (8) Probably, *ieug^s-mn-to- is the earlier remake of PIE *ieug^mn 'yoking'; (9) is the more recent, productive deverbal derivative in -mentum-

<!-- pdf-page: 329; printed-page-estimate: 315 -->

Bibl.: WH I: 726-730, EM 326-328, IEW 508-510, Stuber 2002: 113f, LIV *ieug-.

→ iitxta

Iflpiter, lovis 'Jupiter' [m.] (VOLat., Naev.+); nom. Iupiter, later Iuppiter, also louis (Enn., Acc.+); acc.sg. Diouem [Praeneste], louem; gen. Diouos; Iovos, Diovo [Praeneste, Norba], Diouis, louis; dat. Diovei [Falerii, Mesagne], Iovei [Praeneste, Spoleto], Ioui, abl. Ioue; nom.pl. Ioues (Cic.) Derivatives: Diesptr [nom. Praeneste], Diespiter, -tris (PL, Var.+X Dispiter (Paul, ex F. ) 'father Jupiter'; Vediovis, Veiovis 'an ancient deity, considered to be an underworld counterpart of Jupiter', Vedius 'name of a Roman gens' (Sen.+). Pit nom. *djous, ace. *d(i)jem, gen. *diwos, dat. *djowei » Pit· (1) nom. *dijes, ace. *dijem7 (2) nom. *djous, ace. *djowem, gen. *djowes, dat. *djowei. Sab. adj. *djow-jo- 'of Jupiter'. It. cognates: (1)0. διωρηις, Ιύveis, zoves [gen,], Mars, ioue, O. δισυρει, ζωρηι, χουρηι, diuvei, iuvei, iuvei, U. iuve, iuue [dat.], U. di, dei [voc,] 'Zeus' < gen. *djoweis, dat. *djowei7 voc. *dije (and *djou in iupater) . O. dipatir [nom.], Presam. διποτερες, Marr. ioues patres, u. iuvip(atres?) [gen.], U. iuvepatre, iuve patre [dat.], iupater [voc.] 'Iuppiter'. Possibly Presam. i/opuoi llowijoil (in Tortora AI), but the ending does not fit. (2) U. iuvie, iuvl, tout, iouie, Vol iouio, O. δ]ιοριοι [dat.sg.m,], LL ioui [acc.sg.m.j, U. iuviu, iouiu [abl.sg.m.], iouie, iiouie [voc.sg.m.], Pael. iouiois, Mars, iouies [dat.pl.rn.], Marr. iouia [nom.sg.f.?], O. διωριας, Marr. iouios [gen.sg.f.], U. iuvie, iouie [dat.sg.f ], O. iuviia [acc.sg.f.], U. iouia [voc.sg.f.], O. diuvia[s [nom.pl.f.], iuviais [acc.pl.f.] 'belonging to luppiter' < *djou-io-, from the obi. stem of luppiter, Iovis\ O. diiviiai [datsg.f.] 'of luppiter' (? for *diuviiai?). PIE nom. *di£us, voc. *dieu^ ace. *diem (< *dieum\ gen. *diuos ( » Pit *dieuos\ dat. *diueL IE cognates: Olr. die {did) , OW did [m.] 'day'; Hit. «to,-. id)siuna-7 Pal. tiuna-, Lyd. ciw- 'god' < *diau-, Skt dyav- [m.f.] 'heaven, god of the sky, Father Sky, day' (dyauh [nom.sg.], dyauh [voc.sg.], dyam I divam [acc.sg.], diva [instr.sg.], dive [datsg.], divas I dyoh [gen.abl.sg.], dyavi I divi [loc.sg.]), YAv. diiaos 'of the hell', Myc. dat. di-we /diwei/, Gr nom. Ζευς, voc. Ζευ, gen. Δι(ρ)ός, dat. (loc.) Δι(ρ)ί, dat. also ^Δψεί (e. g. Διρεί-φιλος) , ace. Ζην, since H. also Δί-α, Ζήν-α; Arm. tiw 'day(-time)'·; OCS dbzdb 'rain' < PIE *dus-diu- 'bad weather, rainstorm'. In combination with PIE *ph₂ter: Gr. Ζευς πατήρ, Skt. dyauh pita.

The Latin forms Diespiter, Dispiter, U. di, dei together with the word dies 'day' point to the generalization of a stem *dije-9 whereas Iupiter, lovis reflect Pit. *djow-. These can be derived from a single PIE paradigm for '(god of the) sky, day-light', which phonetically split in two in Pit. and yielded two new stems with semantic specialization. Syllabic *dij- in the nom.acc.sg. can stem from the oblique cases (gen.sg. *diwos9 etc.), in which syllabic *<Λ- occurred. The acc.sg. *dijem led to the creation of a new nom.sg. *dijes and a separate paradigm meaning 'day' (see Lat. dies); some traces of 'sky(-god)' remain in Lat. Diespiter, LL di, del The acc.sg. of 'Zeus' was restored as *diewm > *diowem in Pit., on which the attested paradigm in Latin (louis etc.) and Sab. (*dioueis etc.) was built. The word *dieu- also occurred as a fixed combination with PIE *ph₂ter- 'father', meaning 'Zeus'. Both members were

<!-- pdf-page: 330; printed-page-estimate: 316 -->

originally declined, and the voc.sg. *dieu pater yielded Lat Iiipiter, U. iupater. In Sab., this combination is still declined for case forms. Other case forms of *dieu- have been petrified in Latin diu and -djus-, see s,v. Bibl.: WH I: 732, EM 329, IEW 183-187, Leumann 1977: 357, Sihler 1995: 339, Meiser 1998: 143f., Nussbaum 1999b, Unteimann 2000: 163, 179, 182-187, Rix 2004. → dens, dies, diu, iiiglans, pater

ius, -ris 'broth, sauce' [n. r] (Pl.+) Derivatives: iiisculum 'broth, soup' (Cato). Pit, *jowas- or *jus-. PIE *i(e/o)uH-s- * broth, soup'. IE cognates: Skt- yus- 'soup, broth', Khot yiis 'id/, Gr. ζϋμη * leaven, beer-yeast' < *iuHs-mehr (more difficult to connect: Gr. ζωμός [m.] 'sauce, soup'); GPr.juse [f.], Liihjuse 'broth, soup'; CSjuxa 'broth', Ra uxa 'fish-soup', Cz. jicha 'liquid, sauce, (arch.) soup' < PS1. *juxa < PIE *ie/ouH-s-. Whereas Skt. and Lith. point to *iuH-s-, Slavic requires *ious- < *ieuH-s-. Latin could have either the full grade or the zero grade. Hence, we seem to be dealing with an original s-stem. The appurtenance of Gr. ζΰμη is not completely certain because of the deviant meaning. The root is often analysed as */ew- 'to hold tight, fasten', as attested in Skt. yauti, Lith. jauti, but the semantics are remote, and the root does not contain a final laryngeal (unless, of course, 'soup' would be analysed as */w-//-). Bibl.: WH I: 734, EM 330, IEW 507, Schrijver 1991: 233.

ius, -ris Maw' [n. r] (Lex XII+; in VOLat. inscr. ious) Derivatives: iiistus 'lawful, just' (iouestodi 'iusto' Forum inscr.+, iouiste Paul. exF.\ iiistitia 'justice' (Ter.+); iwrare 'to take an oath, swear' (PL+) (3s. iouvesat 'swears', Duenos inscr.), iurator 'certain official' (PL+); abiwrare 'to deny knowledge of (Pl.+), adiurare 'to swear' (Pl.+), deie/urare 'to swear' (Pl.+), eiu/erare 'to reject under oath', peiie/urare 'to swear falsely' (PL+), peiiuriosus 'addicted to perjury' (PL), peiurium 'perjury' (PL+), peiurus 'perjured' (Pl.+); iniiiratus 'unsworn' (PL+), iniuria 'unlawful conduct, injustice' (Lex XII+), iniurus 'lawless, unjust' (Naev.+), iniurius 'unjust' (Naev.+); iur(i)gare 'to quarrel' (PL+), obiur(i)gare 'to reprove' (PL+), iurgium 'quarrel, dispute' (Pl.+); iudex 'judge' (Lex XII, Pl.+), indicium 'legal process, trial; decision' (PL+), iiidicare 'to judge, try' (Pl.+), iOdicatum 'judgement debt' (LexXII+), iudicatio 'juridical power' (CIL 1.583+). Pit *jowos9 *jowes- 'oath, law', *jowesto- 'just', *jowes-a-je- 'to swear', *jowesago- 'dispute', *jowes-dik- 'judge'. PIE *h₂oi-u, gen.sg. *h₂i-eu-s 'vital force, eternity' » 5-stem *h₂ieu-os, -es-. IE cognates: Olr. uisse 'just, right, fitting' (< *iu-s-t-io-); Skt. yos(-) 'of life', Av.yaoz-da- [adj.] 'possesing power (of life)'; OAv. yaos 'life, health'; Skt ayus- Mife, life span', Av. aiiii- [n.] 'life, lifetime, time' (gen.sg. OAv. yaos, datsg. OAv. yauuoi, yauue, YAv. yauue) , yauuae-su- 'thriving forever', OAv. yauuae-μ- 'living forever1 < PIE *h₂oiu- (gen.sg. *fi2eius I *h₂ieus\ in compounds *-h₂iu-); Gr» ου, Arm. oc\ Alb. as 'not' < *h₂oiu(-kwe). The noun ius probably reflects an s-stem *ieuos > *iouos > ius, with iustus as a

<!-- pdf-page: 331; printed-page-estimate: 317 -->

/o-derivative. The verb iurare reflects a denominative verb Pit. *jowes-a-je-. The verb (ob)iurgare, with spellings (ob)iurigare in PL, and iurgium, seem to be based on a noun *iiirago- < *ious-ago- < *ieuos-hjgrO- 'bringing the oath* vel sim. According to Leumann 1977: 546, the alternation between -ierare and -iurare in die-, e-, pe/per-ie/urare is due to contamination of per-iurare with peierare 'to worsen' to peius. The noun iudex has analogical -ex instead of -ix\ it probably reflects *ieuos-diJcr, or it has been formed from iiis plus *dik- after the contraction of *iowos > iiis. The Latin word goes back to a PIE .s-stem, which apparently was derived from an ablauting w-stem *h₂oi-u, gen.sg. *h₂i-eu-s, as reflected in Av. aiiu-. Bibl.: WH I: 733, EM 329, IEW 512, Leumann 1977: 96, 391, 546, Schrijver 1991: 273f., Sihler 1995: 213, 306, Dunkel 2000a: 94. -> aevum, iiigis, iuvenis

iuvencus 'young bull' [m. o] (Lucr.+) Derivatives: iuvenca 'young cow, heifer' (Varro+). Pit. *juwnko-. It. cognates: U. iuengar [nom.pl.], iveka, iuenga [acc.pl.] 'young cow'. PIE *h₂iu-htn~ko- 'young one, young animal', IE cognates: Olr. oacy W. ieuanc 'youth' < PCI. *iuuanL·-, Skt.yuvasa- 'young', Go. jugga-laups 'youth₁, OHGjung, Olc. ungr 'young1. A derivative in *-ko- of the PIE word reflected in iuvenis. The sequence -enc- instead of -inc- is unexpected. Iuvencus can be explained as a Sabellism, or as influenced by iuvenis and iuventus. \. Bibl.: WH I: 735, EM 330, IEW 510f., Schrijver 19?I: 32If., Meiser 1998: 81, 91, Untermann 2000: 354. → iuvenis

iuvenis syoung man' [m. i] (PL+) Derivatives: iuventus 'youth' (Pl.+), iuventa 'youth' (Lab.+), iuventas 'youth' (Lucr.+); iunior 'younger' (Pl.+); iunix, -wis 'young cow, heifer' (Persius Flaccus, hapax), Iiinius [adj.] 'the month of June' (Enn.+), Ιϋηό 'the goddess Juno' (Pl.+). Pit. *juwen- 'young', * juntos 'younger'. It. cognates: maybe U. iouies [dat.pl.], iouie [acc.pl.] '?\ party of able-bodied men: ^ieu-ie-Ί PIE *h₂iu-hien- 'who possesses vital force5 > 'young'; comp. *h₂iu-h₁n-ios. IE cognates: SkL yiivan- 'young; young man', YAv. yuuandm [acc.sg.], jw^m [gen.pl·] 'youth', yoista- 'youngest'; yauua [mj 'youth'; Lith. jaunas 'young', OCS jum> < PIE *h₂iou-Hn-o-; Go. jundr [f.] 'youth' < *h₂iu-hin-ti-.

The original η-stem *iuwen- was made into an i-stem. The e instead of/ in the second syllable of iuvenis is probably due to iuventus, where -e- was phonetically retained. The comparative iunior occurs beside iuueniory suggesting that it represents a contraction of the latter. The abstract iuventus is clearly more original than iuventa and iuventas. Lat. iunTx is derived from *h₂iu-Hn-ih₂- by Rix 1981: although ιϋηϊχ is a comparatively recent hapax, it is difficult to see how it could have arisen secondarily. Rix assumes that the Etr. counterpart uni of Lat. Ιϋηό reflects a borrowing from Latin *iuni before the suffix *-k- was added. The goddess fund will then represent a different extension of the stem *iun- 'young'. The month name Iiinius might be a derivative off. *ium-9 as Rix p. 279 proposes. Fortson 2002 connects the family name

<!-- pdf-page: 332; printed-page-estimate: 318 -->

Junius as from */ow-. Bibl.: WH I: 735f, EM 331, IEW 510f, Leumann 1977: 83, Rix 1981: 274-279, Schrijver 1991: 152, 322, Meiser 199£: 155, Untennann 2000: 353. → aevum, iugis, ius, iuvencus

iuvo, -are 'to help, assist' [v. I; pf iuvi, ppp. iutum] (Carmen Arvale+, PL+; CIL sb. iouent, also pr. iuvere Ace.) Derivatives: iucundus 'agreeable' (PL+); adiuvare 'to help' (Pl.+), deiuvare 'to refuse help to' (PL); adiutare 'to help' (PL+), adiutabilis 'helpful' (Pl.+), odiutor 'helper' (PL+), adiutrix 'female helper' (PL+). Pit. */yow-. PIE *h₁i-h₁euH-(e/o-) [pr.] 'to help\ IE cognates: Olr. con-οί, -oat 'to protect'; Skt. pr. avati, pf ova [3s.act], ta-ptc. uta- 'to help, protect', OAv. auuami [ls.pr.] 'to help, care', uz-uiuiidi [inf.] 'to protect'. Pf. ιύνϊ < *iuwa-wi, iutus < *iuwatos. This suggests an earlier stem *iuwa-, as is preserved in some forms of the verb iuvere < Pit. *i(j)ewa-. Lat. iuvere has replaced *iovere by analogy with iuvare. Lat. iuvare may be a secondary iterative to (the predecessor of) iuvere, or it has been backformed from adriuvore (cf pellere - appellare); in the first case, iuvare has its -w- (for *iovare) by analogy with adriuvare. The pf.sb. forms iuverit, iuverint could be replacements of *iuveri(n)t on the model of fuerit (thus Leumann), or they reflect a Pit. reduplicated s-present *Hi-HieuH-es- (as O. didest 'will give'; cf. also monerint < *-e.s-). Bibh: WH I: 736f, EM 331, IEW 77-78, Leumann 1977: 596, Garcia Ramon 1996, Meiser 1998: 184, 188,206, Rix 1999: 520, LIV *h₁euH-.

iuxta 'near by, equally; next to' [adv.; prep.] (PL+) Derivatives: iuxtim [adv.] 'in close proximity' (Andr.+). Pit *jougVsto-. PIE *(H)ieug-s- 'yoke'? The preservation of the cluster -kst- points to syncope from *iugVstad>i abl.sg.f. of *iugVsto-. One might posit an adj. *ieug-s-to- "yoked5 derived from *ieug-e/os- [n.] 'team of animals, yoke' which is preserved in Lat. iiigera. This would have to be a rather old derivative, from before the generalization of the full-grade suffix *-es-/-os-. This hypothesis seems more likely than to posit *iug-isto- 'most connected with, closest' with the PIE superlative suffix *-ist(H)o-, since this suffix is not otherwise found in Latin, and also, *iwg- is not an adjective. Bibl.: WH I: 737, EM 328, IEW 508-510, Cowgill 1970: 125, LIV *ieug-. -> iungo
