---
title: "The Cambridge Handbook of Germanic Linguistics"
author: "Michael T. Putnam and B. Richard Page (eds.)"
date: "2020"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "putnam-ed-2020-cambridge-handbook-germanic.epub.zip"
chunk: "[[page 193]] Chapter 9 Verbal Inflectional Morphology in Germanic"
pages: "193-213"
---

# [[page 193]] Chapter 9 Verbal Inflectional Morphology in Germanic

**Contributor(s):** David Fertig

## 9.1 Introduction

Although the present-day Germanic languages show a great deal of diversity in their verbal inflectional systems, a number of characteristics are widely shared across the family. Grammatical categories generally relevant to the description of Germanic verbal inflection are: tense (present [<span class="sc">prs</span>] versus past [<span class="sc">pst</span>]) (Section 9.2.1); subject agreement for person (1, 2, 3) and number (singular [<span class="sc">sg</span>], plural [<span class="sc">pl</span>]) (Section 9.2.2), mood (indicative [<span class="sc">ind</span>], subjunctive [<span class="sc">sbjv</span>], imperative [<span class="sc">imp</span>]) (Section 9.2.3), and voice (active, passive, middle [<span class="sc">mid</span>]) (Section 9.2.4). Nonfinite forms include an infinitive [<span class="sc">inf</span>] (which generally serves as the citation form), a present participle [<span class="sc">presp]</span>, and a past participle [<span class="sc">pp</span>] (Section 9.2.7). The most fundamental inflectional-class distinction is between strong verbs, which generally mark the present–past distinction with a root-vowel alternation (ablaut), and weak verbs, which rely mainly on a “dental” suffix (generally *-d-, -t-*, or *-ð-*) (Section 9.5). Among the modern languages, synthetic forms reflecting most or all of these categories and distinctions are best represented in Icelandic and Standard German, as shown in Table 9.1, with reconstructed Proto-Germanic endings in the rightmost column (based on Ringe 2006; two endings separated by a slash represent strong versus weak differences).

**Table 9.1 Full paradigms of ‘give’ (strong) and ‘hear’ (weak) in Icelandic and German**

```tsv
	Icelandic strong	German strong	PGmc	weak	weak	ending(s) (str/wk)
<span class="sc">inf</span>		gefa ‘give’	heyra ‘hear’	geben ‘give’	hören ‘hear’	-Vną
<span class="sc">prs</span>
<span class="sc">ind</span>	<span class="sc">1sg</span>	gef	heyri	gebe	höre	-ō
	<span class="sc">2sg</span>	gefur	heyrir	gibst	hörst	-zi/si
	<span class="sc">3sg</span>	gefur	heyrir	gibt	hört	-di/þi
	<span class="sc">1pl</span>	gefum	heyrum	geben	hören	-maz
	<span class="sc">2pl</span>	gefið	heyrið	gebt	hört	-d/þ
	<span class="sc">3pl</span>	gefa	heyra	geben	hören	-ndi
<span class="sc">sbjv</span>	<span class="sc">1sg</span>	gefi	heyri	gebe	(höre)	-a-ų
	<span class="sc">2sg</span>	gefir	heyrir	gebest	hörest	-ai-z/s
	<span class="sc">3sg</span>	gefi	heyri	gebe	höre	-ai
	<span class="sc">1pl</span>	gefum	heyrum	(geben)	(hören)	-ai-m
	<span class="sc">2pl</span>	gefið	heyrið	(gebet)	(höret)	-ai-d
	<span class="sc">3pl</span>	gefi	heyri	(geben)	(hören)	-ai-n
<span class="sc">pst</span>
<span class="sc">ind</span>	<span class="sc">1sg</span>	gaf	heyrði	gab	hörte	∅/-ǭ
	<span class="sc">2sg</span>	gafst	heyrðir	gabst	hörtest	-t/-ēz
	<span class="sc">3sg</span>	gaf	heyrði	gab	hörte	∅/-ē
	<span class="sc">1pl</span>	gáfum	heyrðum	gaben	hörten	-u-m
	<span class="sc">2pl</span>	gáfuð	heyrðuð	gabt	hörtet	-u-d
	<span class="sc">3pl</span>	gáfu	heyrðu	gaben	hörten	-u-n
<span class="sc">sbjv</span>	<span class="sc">1sg</span>	gæfi	heyrði	gäbe	----	-ij-ų (?)
	<span class="sc">2sg</span>	gæfir	heyrðir	gäb[e]st	----	-ī-z
	<span class="sc">3sg</span>	gæfi	heyrði	gäbe	----	-ī
	<span class="sc">1pl</span>	gæfum	heyrðum	gäben	----	-ī-m
	<span class="sc">2pl</span>	gæfuð	heyrðuð	gäb[e]t	----	-ī-d
	<span class="sc">3pl</span>	gæfu	heyrðu	gäben	----	-ī-n
<span class="sc">imp</span>	<span class="sc">2sg</span>	gef(ðu)	heyr(ðu)	gib	hör(e)	∅
<span class="sc">pp</span>		gefinn	heyrður	gegeben	gehört	-ana-/-da-
supine		gefið	heyrt	----	----	----
<span class="sc">presp</span>		gefandi	heyrandi	gebend	hörend	-and-
<span class="sc">mid</span>		gefast, etc.	heyrast, etc.	----	----	----
```

In addition to synthetic forms, all of the languages make use of periphrastic constructions consisting of an auxiliary plus a nonfinite main verb (Section 9.4). These constructions figure prominently in the marking of tense, mood, and voice distinctions in all modern Germanic languages. Some varieties have also developed grammaticalized constructions that mark aspectual distinctions (Section 9.4.4).

## [[page 194]] 9.2 Morphosyntactic Categories of Germanic Verbal Inflection

### 9.2.1 Tense

All of the Germanic languages, modern and older, have a tense distinction between present (or nonpast) and past. Most of the modern languages still mark this opposition primarily with reflexes of inflectional patterns inherited from Proto-Germanic. In addition, all of the modern languages have a periphrastic “perfect” construction (*she* ***has eaten*** *dinner*). In most of the present-day languages the perfect contrasts functionally with the synthetic “simple past” (or “preterite”), but in some it has become the primary or even the only way of expressing past tense. Many grammars classify the [[page 195]] perfect as a tense – or a set of tenses: present perfect, past perfect, future perfect. Quite a few linguists, however, regard the perfect – where it stands in opposition to a simple past – as something other than (merely) a tense (Huddleston 2002: 116, Harbert 2007: 307–315). The form of the perfect construction is discussed in Section 9.4.1.

Similarly, grammars often characterize at least one auxiliary + infinitive construction in each language as a “future tense” (e.g., English *he* ***will leave*** *tomorrow*). For every Germanic language, it can be shown that (1) these constructions have a modal sense (generally involving probability or evidentiality); and (2) “present” forms are commonly used to talk about future events (*he* ***leaves****/****is leaving*** *tomorrow*). Many linguists thus argue that no Germanic language has a true future tense, and the “present” is better understood as a “non-past” (Booij 2002: 70, Huddleston 2002: 208–210, Thráinsson 2007: 15–16). The “future” constructions are described in Section 9.4.2.

### 9.2.2 Subject Agreement

In all of the modern (standard) West Germanic languages except Afrikaans and in the insular North Germanic languages (Icelandic and Faroese) – as well as in the older languages of all branches – verbs are inflected for agreement with the subject in person and number (e.g., English <span class="sc">3sg prs ind</span> *walk****s*** versus non-<span class="sc">3sg</span> *walk*). The usual number of distinct forms today is everywhere fewer than the six that would be possible with 3 persons x 2 numbers, ranging from five in most cases in Icelandic down to at most two in standard English. The continental North Germanic languages (Swedish, Norwegian, Danish), along with Afrikaans, have lost subject agreement entirely, as have many nonstandard varieties of English.

Patterns of syncretism are largely language or branch specific, but one widespread pattern, found everywhere except early North Germanic, is exceptionless identity of the <span class="sc">1sg</span> and <span class="sc">3sg pst ind</span> – and of the <span class="sc">1sg</span> and <span class="sc">3sg prs ind</span> of preterite-present verbs (see Section 9.5.4). In all of the modern languages – and in older varieties of West Germanic – this <span class="sc">1sg</span>=<span class="sc">3sg</span> pattern holds for both tenses of the subjunctive as well, making an inflectional difference between <span class="sc">1sg</span> and <span class="sc">3sg</span> characteristic of the <span class="sc">prs ind</span>. A <span class="sc">2sg</span>=<span class="sc">3sg</span> pattern in the <span class="sc">prs ind</span> has been characteristic of North Germanic since Old Norse times, although this has been disrupted in one set of verbs in modern Icelandic and Faroese by the accretion of a final *-t* or -ð in the <span class="sc">2sg</span> (Orešnik 1980). Modern Dutch has also developed <span class="sc">2sg</span>=<span class="sc">3sg</span> syncretism in the present tense. Exceptionless identity of <span class="sc">1pl</span> and <span class="sc">3pl</span> is a feature of modern standard German and closely related varieties, including Yiddish and Pennsylvania German. Regular sound change from Proto-Germanic resulted in identity of the <span class="sc">3sg prs ind</span> with the <span class="sc">2pl</span>. This pattern is maintained in Gothic and partially in the older West Germanic languages and in modern German. One of the main defining characteristics of the [[page 196]] Ingvaeonic subgroup within West Germanic – which includes English, Frisian, and most dialects of Low German – is a uniform plural (<span class="sc">1pl</span>=<span class="sc">2pl=3pl</span>). Dutch, Faroese, and quite a few dialects of German have joined the uniform plural group in modern times. This is consistent with the typological generalization that languages tend to make more inflectional distinctions in morphosyntactically “unmarked” contexts (e.g., singular) than in the corresponding marked contexts (plural) (Haspelmath 2006: 38). Similarly, we often find fewer agreement distinctions in the past and / or subjunctive than in the present indicative. Dutch, for example, has a three-way distinction in the present but only two distinct forms in the past. Exceptions to the typological generalization, however, are found in Icelandic, which has three distinct forms everywhere in the plural but usually only two in the singular (see Table 9.1), and Gothic, with one fewer distinct forms in the present indicative active than in the subjunctive or in either mood of the past.

Gothic is the only attested Germanic language with a three-way (singular–dual–plural) number distinction in verbal agreement. Accordingly, Gothic has eight distinct forms in its subjunctive active paradigms – the maximum possible since there is no third person dual – and seven in the indicative active. Old English, Old Saxon, and Old Norse maintain a three-way number distinction in their personal pronouns but use plural verb forms with dual subjects.

In the second person, all of the present-day languages except English have conventions for distinguishing formal from informal address. In languages with subject agreement, this has implications for verbal inflection. Yiddish uses its regular <span class="sc">2pl</span> pronouns and the corresponding agreement endings for formal address. Icelandic uses special pronouns with <span class="sc">2pl</span> agreement. Faroese and Frisian are similar, except that the ending is the undifferentiated <span class="sc">pl</span>. German is unique in using <span class="sc">3pl</span> pronouns and agreement. Dutch – like Icelandic, Faroese, and Frisian – has a special pronoun (*U*) for second person formal but uses it with a <span class="sc">sg</span> verb form, which is ambiguous between 2<span class="sc">sg</span> and <span class="sc">3sg</span> for most verbs (Booij 2002: 56–57). Like English, Dutch has completely lost its original Germanic <span class="sc">2sg</span> pronouns and agreement endings (Middle Dutch *du -s*; archaic English *thou -st*) and replaced them with what had been <span class="sc">2pl</span> forms.

Dutch also has a syntactically conditioned alternation in its <span class="sc">2sg</span> agreement. The ending *-t* occurs when the verb is not immediately followed by the subject pronoun *jij / je*. When the pronoun is present, the agreement ending is ∅. Similar alternations occur in the <span class="sc">1pl</span> in medieval and early modern German (Fertig 2000: 47–49, Axel and Weiß 2011: 38–40) and in both the <span class="sc">1pl</span> and <span class="sc">2pl</span> in Old English (Campbell 1959: 296–297) as well as in a number of nonstandard continental West Germanic varieties today, where we also find cases in which the agreement ending on the verb depends on whether it is in a syntactic position typical of main or of subordinate clauses (Weiß 2005). This bears some resemblance to the [[page 197]] Northern Subject Rule in northern England and Scotland, where verbs with non-<span class="sc">3sg</span> subjects can take the ending *-s* – like the <span class="sc">3sg</span> – so long as they are not immediately adjacent to a pronominal subject, whereby it makes no difference whether the pronoun precedes or follows the verb (Pietsch 2005). Some of these “double agreement” patterns clearly originated in phonological interaction between the agreement ending and the subject pronoun, but synchronically the conditioning is generally not purely phonological (Booij 2002: 58).

In a number of nonstandard modern dialects, certain subject agreement endings occur not only on the verb, but also on the complementizer in subordinate clauses. See van Koppen, Chapter 14, for discussion and examples.

### 9.2.3 Mood

#### 9.2.3.1 The Imperative

All of the Germanic languages have at least one second person imperative construction, usually characterized by the absence of an overt subject pronoun – although in present-day Icelandic an enclitic pronoun has become the norm in the imperative singular, and in the German formal imperative the subject pronoun (*Sie*) is obligatory. The use of the bare verb stem for the <span class="sc">2sg</span> imperative goes back to Proto-Indo-European, and the distinctness of this form in each modern language depends largely on how well other endings have been preserved. In Icelandic, Faroese, and standard German, bare stems of many verbs are still used for no function other than the <span class="sc">2sg</span> imperative. At the other end of the spectrum is Afrikaans, where the bare stem is used throughout the present-tense system. For all verbs other than *be*, standard English differs only in the <span class="sc">3sg</span>.

In languages that distinguish between <span class="sc">2sg</span> and <span class="sc">2pl</span> imperative, the <span class="sc">2pl</span> is usually identical to the indicative. This was the case in all of the older Germanic languages, but in modern Faroese and archaic modern Dutch, an old <span class="sc">2pl</span> form has survived in the imperative that has been lost to analogical leveling in the indicative. Gothic is the only attested Germanic language with third person imperative forms.

### 9.2.3.2 The Subjunctive

The older languages all maintained an inflectional distinction, in both tenses, between indicative and subjunctive – the latter often called “optative” based on its Indo-European origins. The conventional labels “present” and “past subjunctive” are based more on morphological form than on function (see Table 9.1). Today, the subjunctive is most fully intact in Icelandic. In West Germanic, the present subjunctive’s best chances for survival were always in the 3<span class="sc">sg</span>, where the indicative has a distinctive consonantal ending (*-t, -th, -s*, etc.). Standard German [[page 198]] still uses 3<span class="sc">sg</span> present subjunctive forms. Their main function today is for reported speech, and they are particularly common in journalistic texts, as in (1).

(1) ```tsv
  Angela	Merkel behauptet	sie	distanzier**e**	sich	nicht
  Angela	Merkel claims	she distance-<span class="sc">3sg.prs.sbjv</span> herself not [colspan=2]
  von	der Resolution …
  from the resolution … [colspan=6]
  “Angela Merkel claims she is not distancing herself from the resolution …” (www.wiwo.de/politik/deutschland/14492128.html) [colspan=6]
  ```

Some speakers of (especially American) English also maintain a <span class="sc">3sg</span> subjunctive, which distinguishes itself from the indicative by its lack of *-s*, e.g., *it is very important that he* ***arrive*** *on time*. In standard German and the relevant varieties of English, present subjunctive forms of the verb ‘to be’ are used for all persons and numbers. Most of the other modern languages – and many varieties of English – retain nothing more than a few traces of old <span class="sc">prs sbjv</span> forms in lexicalized idioms, e.g., Dutch *het* ***zij*** *so* ‘it may be so’, Swedish ***Leve*** *konnungen!* ‘Long live the king’.

The current situation in the past subjunctive is similar. Outside of Icelandic and German, English <span class="sc">1/3sg</span> *were* (*I wish it* ***were*** *Friday*) is probably the most robust relic. Swedish has a cognate in *vore*, along with a handful of other rarely used forms. The other languages retain at most a few uses in fixed idioms. At the other extreme, many southern dialects of German make heavy use of synthetic past subjunctive forms of all verbs. These are dialects that supposedly lost the simple past (see Section 9.3.1), but – unlike Yiddish, Afrikaans, and Pennsylvania German (and southern colloquial varieties that are closer to standard German than to the traditional dialects) – they actually only lost the past indicative while retaining a synthetic past subjunctive. In many places, a weak past suffix *-ɒt* or *-ɒd* has been generalized to all verbs, e.g., *ī žraiwɒd* ‘I would write’. In some dialects, this suffix can co-occur with ablaut of the root vowel in strong verbs: *ī žr****ī****wɒd* (Wiesinger 1989: 56–61). The limited use of the synthetic past subjunctive in standard German is described in Section 9.4.3 below.

### 9.2.4 Voice

Gothic has synthetic passive forms cognate with mediopassives in other branches of Indo-European. Only a few traces of such forms survive elsewhere in Germanic. North Germanic has developed new synthetic forms, sometimes referred to as mediopassives, from what were originally enclitic reflexive pronouns (see Lee-Schoenfeld, Chapter 21). The resulting suffix – *-st* in Icelandic, Faroese, and Nynorsk; *-s* in Bokmål, Swedish, and Danish – occurs after any other inflectional endings and can be added to both finite and nonfinite forms. In Icelandic, it behaves in a number of respects more like a derivational than an inflectional affix, making its [[page 199]] position outside of all inflectional formatives highly unusual (Anderson 1990, Thráinsson 1994: 161–162). In the modern continental North Germanic languages, especially Swedish, *-s(t)* is used more productively than in Icelandic to form passives and is generally regarded as an inflectional category of the verb (Harbert 2007: 327–329, Alexiadou and Schäfer, Chapter 20).

### 9.2.5 Aspect

The absence of any inflectional marking of aspectual distinctions, such as perfective–imperfective, is a defining characteristic that sets Germanic apart from many other branches of Indo-European. Today, modern English and Icelandic stand out among the (standard) Germanic languages for their fully grammaticalized opposition between “simple” (*they dance*) and “progressive” (*they are dancing*) aspect. The English and Icelandic progressive constructions, along with less grammaticalized counterparts in other Germanic languages and a few related constructions, are described in Section 9.4.4. Many linguists also regard the perfect (Section 9.4.1) as (partly) an aspect.

### 9.2.6 Negation

Negation has come to be marked inflectionally on auxiliaries in modern (informal) English. That the formative represented orthographically as <n’t> is an inflectional suffix rather than an enclitic is most apparent in forms like *won’t* and *don’t*, whose phonological form is not predictable from the components *will + not* and *do + not* (Huddleston 2002: 90–92).

### 9.2.7 Nonfinite Verb Forms

All Germanic languages have nonfinite forms used in verbal constructions with auxiliaries as well as in substantival or adjectival functions. Across the entire family, it is common to speak of an infinitive, a present participle, and a past participle. The term “infinitive” is widely used to refer to: (1) a synthetic form often called the “bare infinitive”, whose functions include complement of a modal auxiliary; (2) a construction, sometimes known as the “prepositional infinitive”, in which the verb form in (1) is preceded by a particle derived historically from an allative preposition (see Wurmbrand and Christopoulos, Chapter 17). The extent to which (1) is distinct from other forms of the verb varies from language to language. Modern English and Afrikaans arguably have no bare-infinitive form but rather a polyfunctional “plain form” (Huddleston 2002: 83). The other modern languages – and all of the older languages – have a synthetic infinitive with a nonnull reflex of the Proto-Germanic suffix **-Vną* that makes it distinct from most or all finite present forms.

[[page 200]] The particle used for the prepositional infinitive is a cognate of English *to* throughout West Germanic, a cognate of *at* in North Germanic, and an etymologically mysterious *du* in Gothic.

Modern Frisian has an additional nonfinite form often called the “gerund”, generally formed by adding *-n* to the infinitive. Cognate forms with the suffix *-Vnne* (*-Vnnia* in Old Saxon) were present everywhere in earlier West Germanic. The gerund provided dative and (occasionally) genitive forms to complement the inherently nominative / accusative infinitive. The prepositional infinitives in the modern West Germanic languages actually descend from a *to* + gerund construction. Yiddish has a special nonfinite form known as the “tautological infinitive”, used for clause-initial topics and formed by adding *-n* to a finite form of the verb. With regular verbs, this yields a form identical to the infinitive, but many irregular verbs have distinct tautological infinitives (Jacobs 2005: 212–213).

Everywhere except Yiddish and modern English, the present-participle suffix for all verbs has the form *-(V)nd(V)*, inherited from Proto-Indo-European. Yiddish has added an additional suffixal element, yielding *-endik*. In English, the present participle has fallen together with a verbal noun in *-Vng(V)*, resulting in the *-ing* form that is used in both noun-like and adjectival/participial functions today. The widespread nonstandard pronunciation of *-ing* with /n/ rather than /ŋ/ reflects the original present participle. Labov (1994: 583–584) has shown that many English speakers today still tend to use /n/ more often in participial function versus /ŋ/ for the verbal noun. In most of the Germanic languages, the present participle plays little or no role in periphrastic verbal constructions, the use of English *-ing* for progressive aspect being the major exception (Section 9.4.4).

The past participle has always been treated as one of the principle parts of the verbal paradigm in every Germanic language. Reflexes of the Proto-Germanic <span class="sc">pp</span> suffixes – *-Vn(-)* for strong verbs; *-d(-)* or *-t(-)* for weak – are largely intact in some modern varieties, such as standard German, Yiddish, and written Dutch. In other languages and dialects, one or both of the suffixes has been lost or altered beyond recognition in at least a large subset of verbs. Grammars of the modern North Germanic languages identify an additional, closely related form known as the “supine”, which is used primarily in the perfect construction (Section 9.4.1) and is generally identical or very similar to the (nominative / accusative <span class="sc">sg</span>) neuter form of the past participle.

## 9.3 Types of Exponents

Suffixes are the most heavily used type of exponent in Germanic verbal inflection, marking morphosyntactic distinctions in every category. In the past tense of weak verbs, it is possible in the older and the more conservative languages to identify distinct tense and agreement affixes. In Icelandic *heyrðum*, for example, the -*ð-* can be analyzed as an exponent of <span class="sc">pst</span> and the [[page 201]] -*um* as an exponent of <span class="sc">1pl</span> agreement. Otherwise, as in other branches of Indo-European, cumulative exponence is the norm (Matthews 1972). The *-t* in German *gibt* ‘gives’, for example, might be regarded as a <span class="sc">3sg</span> agreement ending, but since it does not occur in the past tense or the subjunctive, it is also an exponent of present and indicative, much like English <span class="sc">3sg</span> *-s*.

Prefixes play a much more limited role in Germanic verbal inflection, but one important one is the *ge-* that occurs on most past participles in many West Germanic varieties. This prefix is sometimes analyzed as part of a circumfix, together with the strong or weak <span class="sc">pp</span> suffix (Simmler 1998: 85–86). Afrikaans lacks these suffixes, leaving *ge-* as the only exponent of the <span class="sc">pp.</span> The Gothic reduplicant is another important prefixal element (Section 9.5.1). In some Germanic languages, a case can also be made for analyzing the infinitive particle as a prefix. Whereas English *to* and Swedish *att* can be separated from the verbal part of the infinitive (*to boldly go* …), this is completely impossible in German, Dutch, and Afrikaans, as it was in Old English (Harbert 2007: 338–339). In colloquial English forms such as *wanna, gonna, hafta*, by contrast, *to* has been reanalyzed as part of the auxiliary (Palmer et al. 2002: 1616–1618).

Some inflectional affixes display patterns of phonologically predictable allomorphy. Assimilatory /t/–/d/ alternations in the weak <span class="sc">pst</span>/<span class="sc">pp</span> suffix occur in several of the modern West and North Germanic languages. Modern Icelandic has a related but more complex pattern of allomorphy in the weak <span class="sc">pst</span> suffix. Standard German breaks up *tt* and *tst* sequences through schwa-epenthesis. Many of the other languages instead deal with such sequences through degemination and cluster simplification. In spoken English, the weak past suffix shows a three-way alternation involving both voicing assimilation and epenthesis: /t/–/d/–/ɨd/. The parallel /s/–/z/–/ɨz/ alternation in the <span class="sc">3sg prs ind</span> occurs in both verbal and nominal inflection (noun plurals and possessives). The <*-(e)n*> suffix of the <span class="sc">inf</span>, the <span class="sc">1/3pl</span> and the strong <span class="sc">pp</span> in standard German and Yiddish alternates between /ən/ and /n̩/, depending mainly on the preceding segment. This allomorphy is reflected in Yiddish – but not German – orthography. The same suffix shows more complex patterns of allomorphy in many nonstandard varieties of German.

The presence of the *ge-* <span class="sc">pp</span> prefix is prosodically conditioned in German, Yiddish, and Afrikaans. When the main stress is not on the first syllable of the verb, *ge-* is not added, e.g., German *stuˈdieren* [<span class="sc">inf</span>]–*stuˈdiert* [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘study’. In standard Dutch, by contrast, the conditioning is morphological: The prefix is added unless the verb already begins with an unstressed prefix: *stuˈderen–****ge****stuˈdeerd*, but *beˈginnen–beˈgonnen* ‘begin’ (Booij 2002: 74).

Morphologized root-vowel alternations are the second most important exponent type in Germanic verbal inflection. One set of alternations shared across the entire family – except Afrikaans – goes back to the Indo-European phenomenon known as ablaut (Section 9.5.2). Ablaut alternations are often the sole or primary marker of the morphosyntactic [[page 202]] distinctions with which they correlate (*sing–sang–sung*). In West and North Germanic languages, the assimilatory effects triggered by certain vowels and glides in following unstressed syllables – which were subsequently lost in many cases – have given rise to numerous additional root-vowel alternations. One important class of these is commonly referred to as umlaut or mutation. Such alternations often accompany suffixal marking (e.g., *tell–told*, German *trage* [<span class="sc">1sg prs</span>]*–trägt* [<span class="sc">3sg prs ind</span>] ‘carry’). In modern German and Icelandic, umlaut alternations serve as primary marker of the past indicative–subjunctive distinction in important subsets of verbs (see Table 9.1). Historical lengthenings and shortenings are also reflected in some modern root-vowel alternations (e.g., *keep–kept*; German *nehme* [<span class="sc">1sg prs</span>]*–nimmt* [<span class="sc">3sg prs ind</span>] ‘take’).

Morphologized or lexicalized root-final consonant alternations are of less systematic importance but are fairly widespread in irregular verbs. They often go hand-in-hand with root-vowel alternations (e.g., *wa****s***–*we****r****e; tea****ch***–*tau****gh****t*; German *zie****h****e* [<span class="sc">1sg prs</span>]–*zo****g*** [<span class="sc">1/3sg pst ind</span>] ‘pull’, Swedish *få* [<span class="sc">inf</span>]–*fi****ck*** [<span class="sc">pst</span>] ‘get’). Consonant alternations occasionally serve as sole exponent of a morphosyntactic distinction, e.g., *send*–*sent*.

Most Germanic languages have a small number of suppletive verb paradigms (Fertig 1998, Corbett 2007). It is common to distinguish between strong suppletion, where forms of a lexical item bear no apparent resemblance to each other, and weak suppletion, where all the forms have some segments in common, but the inflectional pattern is nevertheless idiosyncratic. In most of the Germanic languages, strong suppletion in verbal inflection is restricted to the verb ‘be’. English and Gothic also have strong suppletion in ‘go’: Modern English *go–went*; Old English *gān–ēode*; Gothic *gaggan–iddja*. Weak suppletion is much more widespread (see Section 9.5.3 for a few examples).

## 9.4 Periphrastic Constructions

Throughout their histories, the Germanic languages have relied on a combination of synthetic inflection and periphrastic constructions to mark the grammatical categories of the verb. This division of labor has tended to shift over time in favor of periphrasis. The periphrastic constructions generally consist (minimally) of an auxiliary plus a nonfinite form of a main verb. In colloquial English, a system of grammaticalized clitic forms of auxiliaries has developed, e.g., *would/had* → *’d, is/has* → *’s* (Palmer et al. 2002:1614–1616; see also Sections 9.2.6, 9.4.2).

### 9.4.1 The Perfect

Perfect constructions consisting of auxiliary + past participle or supine are common to all of the modern Germanic languages. A cognate of English [[page 203]] *have* is the most common auxiliary in every language today. Present-day English and Swedish, and – with the exception of main verb ‘be’ – Afrikaans use *have* exclusively. The other modern languages sometimes use ‘be’, generally with intransitive predicates that express change of location (e.g., ‘go/ride to/from/through’) or change of state (e.g., ‘become’, ‘freeze’, ‘die’). In Icelandic, Faroese, and to some extent in Nynorsk, ‘have’ combines with the supine, but ‘be’ with an inflected past participle.

In English and throughout North Germanic, the general function of the present perfect is to express present relevance of events that occurred or situations that began in the past. In German, Dutch, and Frisian, by contrast, the use of the perfect has shifted and expanded considerably at the expense of the simple past. This development has reached its ultimate conclusion in Yiddish, and for the most part in Afrikaans, Pennsylvania German, and most southern varieties of German, where the synthetic past (indicative) has been lost and replaced by the perfect for (nearly) all verbs (Schirmunski 1962: 489–492).

Wherever simple past forms of ‘have’ – and, where relevant, ‘be’ – still exist, a past perfect (pluperfect) can be formed with a past-tense auxiliary + past participle, as in English *I* ***had seen*** *the film*. Especially where the simple past forms of the auxiliaries have been lost, a three-part construction is possible with present-tense auxiliary + past participle of auxiliary + past participle of main verb, e.g., German *ich* ***habe*** *den Film* ***gesehen gehabt***.

### 9.4.2 The Future

Most languages use a modal verb + bare infinitive for their “future” constructions. Cognates of *shall* are the most common auxiliary (Dutch, Afrikaans, Frisian, Swedish). Norwegian, Danish, and Faroese use both *shall* and *will*, with a semantic difference. Some varieties of English favor *shall* in the first person (<span class="sc">sg</span> and <span class="sc">pl</span>) versus *will* in the second and third, a pattern well-known from prescriptive grammars, but many speakers – especially outside of England – use only *will* (*’ll, won’t*). The future auxiliary *munu* is unique to Icelandic, as is *vel* to Yiddish. German uses *werden* ‘become’, the same auxiliary that it uses with the past participle for the passive (Section 9.4.5). Motion-verb auxiliaries used in secondary future constructions include cognates of *go* in Dutch and Afrikaans and of *come* in Swedish and Norwegian. The English *be going to* construction is unique in that it requires the progressive form of the auxiliary.

### 9.4.3 The Conditional

All of the modern languages have an auxiliary + bare-infinitive construction (in Yiddish more often auxiliary + past participle), often called the “conditional”, whose functions overlap with those of the past subjunctive (see [[page 204]] Section 9.2.3.2). The auxiliary is the past (subjunctive) form of the future auxiliary in each language (compare Section 9.4.2): English *would* – and in some varieties *should* – Icelandic *mund-*, Swedish *skulle*, Dutch *zou*; Afrikaans *sou*, Frisian *soe*, Yiddish *volt*, standard German *würde*. In most of the present-day languages, past subjunctive functions are split more or less systematically between the periphrastic conditional and the synthetic past tense. The English pattern with <span class="sc">pst</span> in the protasis of (nonpast) counterfactual conditionals and the *would/should* construction in the apodosis illustrates this division of labor: *if I* ***knew*** *the answer, I* ***would be*** *happy to tell you*. Earlier stages of English and other Germanic languages could use past subjunctive in both clauses of counterfactual conditionals, as can modern Icelandic. In languages such as Yiddish and Afrikaans, which have lost the synthetic <span class="sc">pst</span>, the periphrastic conditional is used in all contexts.

For most verbs, modern standard colloquial German patterns with Yiddish and Afrikaans in this respect. German reference grammars often show past subjunctive paradigms for all verbs, but this is misleading. As in the other modern languages, the past subjunctive forms of regular weak verbs are identical to the past indicative. Unlike most of the other languages, however, German generally does not use past forms that are not unambiguously subjunctive for any subjunctive functions. In fact, use of the past subjunctive is only common in present-day standard German for a handful of high-frequency verbs, including *sein* ‘be’, *haben* ‘have’, and the modals. For these verbs, especially *sein* and *haben*, the synthetic past subjunctive forms (*wäre, hätte*) are used almost exclusively in all contexts, including those where other modern Germanic languages would use a conditional construction (2a). Conversely, for the vast majority of German verbs, the *würde* + infinitive construction is normally used everywhere (2b).

(2) 1. a. *Wenn die Küche größer* ***wäre, hätten*** *wir Platz für alle.*

      “If the kitchen were larger, we would have room for everyone.”

    2. b. *Wir* ***würden*** *uns öfter* ***sehen****, wenn wir in der selben Stadt* ***wohnen würden***.

      “We would see each other more often if we lived in the same town.”

### 9.4.4 The Progressive and Other Aspectual Constructions

The English progressive construction combines auxiliary *be* with the *-ing* form of the main verb. The Icelandic progressive uses *vera* ‘be’ with an *að*-infinitive. The grammaticalization of the English and Icelandic progressives has greatly reduced the use of the simple present, robbing it of the central function of referring to events ongoing at the moment of speaking. For most verbs, the simple present is now used mainly to express habitual aspect. The consequences of the rise of the progressive are less drastic in [[page 205]] the past tense, where the simple past remains the normal way of expressing perfective aspect. English has an additional construction specifically for past habitual: *he* ***used to*** *play basketball*. Yiddish has a functionally similar construction with the auxiliary *flegn*.

The other languages have ways of expressing meanings similar to the English and Icelandic progressives, but at least in the standard languages their use is never obligatory. Several languages use a locative preposition (+ definite article) + infinitive to express a progressive-like meaning, e.g., German *ich bin beim / am schreiben* ‘I’m writing’ [literally ‘I am at the write-<span class="sc">inf</span>’]. This construction is limited in standard German in that the infinitive cannot take any (unincorporated) arguments. Some colloquial varieties, however, have a more flexible construction similar to Dutch: *Hans is zijn moeder aan het opbellen* ‘Hans is phoning his mother’ (Booij 2002: 206, Krause 2002). Another widespread pattern uses motion and / or posture verbs, either as auxiliaries with an infinitive, as in Dutch *hij zit te zeuren* ‘he is nagging’ [literally ‘he sits to nag’], or in a coordinate structure, as in Nynorsk *han dreiv og las* ‘he was reading’ [literally: ‘he moved around and read’] (Askedal 1994: 246), Afrikaans *Ek sit en lees* ‘I’m reading’ [literally: ‘I sit and read’] (Donaldson 1993: 220).

### 9.4.5 Passive Constructions

All of the modern Germanic languages have at least one passive construction consisting of auxiliary + past participle (or, rarely, supine). In North Germanic, these constructions overlap in function with the *-s(t)* suffix described in Section 9.2.4. The most common passive auxiliaries are ‘be’ (Icelandic, Swedish, English), ‘become’ (Faroese, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, German, Dutch, Afrikaans, Yiddish, Frisian), and ‘get’ (Norwegian, colloquial English). Many languages have more than one passive construction (see Alexiadou and Schäfer, Chapter 20).

## 9.5 Inflectional Classes

The older Germanic languages all had several relatively well-defined inflectional classes of verbs. Inflectional-class structure has broken down to some degree in most of the modern languages. Grammars of modern English, German, and Dutch typically identify one “regular” pattern, which the vast majority of verbs follow, and a number of “irregular” patterns, most of which apply to at most a handful of verbs.

### 9.5.1 Strong Versus Weak Verbs

The distinction between ablauting strong verbs (*sing*–*sang*–*sung*) and suffixing weak verbs (*walk*–*walked*) is one of the main defining characteristics of [[page 206]] the Germanic family and is maintained to some degree in all of the modern languages except Afrikaans. Weak verbs have a (reflex of a) “dental” suffix in the past tense and participle; strong verbs instead have a root-vowel alternation as the primary marker of the <span class="sc">prs</span>–<span class="sc">pst</span> opposition and – where it has survived – a *-(V)n* suffix in the <span class="sc">pp</span>. The rightmost column in Table 9.1 shows a number of places where strong and weak verbs also had different agreement endings in Proto-Germanic. The most important of these is the <span class="sc">pst ind sg</span>, where strong verbs had no ending in the 1/3<span class="sc">sg</span> and *-t* in the 2<span class="sc">sg</span>, whereas weak verbs had <span class="sc">1sg</span> *-ǭ*<span class="sc">, 2sg</span> *-ēz*, <span class="sc">3sg</span> *-ē*. In spite of analogical and sound changes that have altered the details in various ways, the modern German and Icelandic forms in Table 9.1 still reflect these strong–weak differences. Proto-Germanic also had a class of verbs that formed its past tense through reduplication. This pattern is well-represented in Gothic, but only a few traces survive in the (older) North and West Germanic languages. In their inflectional endings, the reduplicating verbs pattern with the strong verbs.

The traditional defining criterion for the strong versus weak distinction – whether the past tense is marked by ablaut or by a dental suffix – breaks down somewhat in some of the modern languages. On the weak side, the dental suffix has been lost in one of the major classes of verbs in Frisian and some varieties of continental North Germanic (Section 9.5.3.1), and on the strong side Yiddish and those varieties of German that have lost the simple past are left with quite a few strong verbs that have no ablaut alternation since some classes have always had the same ablaut grade in the present and the past participle (Section 9.5.2), e.g., Yiddish *f****o****rn* [<span class="sc">inf</span>]–*gef****o****rn* [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘travel’; this leaves the <span class="sc">pp</span> suffix *-(e)n* versus *-t* as the only remaining consistent difference between strong and weak verbs in these varieties.

### 9.5.2 Strong-Verb Ablaut Classes

In grammars of the older languages and of modern Icelandic, it is customary to characterize strong verb classes in terms of the ablaut grade of four principle parts: (1) the infinitive, whose stem serves as the base for the entire present system; (2) the <span class="sc">1/3sg pst ind</span>; (3) the <span class="sc">1pl pst ind</span>, which has the same ablaut grade as all <span class="sc">pl pst ind</span> and <span class="sc">pst sbjv</span> forms; and (4) the past participle. The majority of Germanic strong verbs have an ablaut pattern that can ultimately be traced back to a proto-Indo-European *e–o–∅–∅* alternation, which becomes *e–a–∅–∅* or *e–a–u–u* in Proto-Germanic. Two other patterns can be regarded as variations on this one: *e–o–ē–∅* (PGmc *e–a– ē₁–∅*) and *e–o–ē–e* (PGmc *e–a–ē₁–e*). The remaining patterns are all two-way alternations, with one vowel in principle parts (1) and (4) and the other in (2) and (3). The most important of these is a Germanic *a–ō* alternation (Class VI).

Verbs following the *e–o–∅–∅* pattern generally have roots ending in -VRC, where R stands for any sonorant (*j, w, l, r, m*, or *n*). These verbs are [[page 207]] traditionally divided into three classes depending on which sonorant they contain: *j* (Class I); *w* (Class II); or one of the liquids or nasals (Class III). The glides, *j* and *w*, form diphthongs with preceding *e* and *a*, and in the *∅*-grade their vocalic counterparts – *i* and *u* – become the syllable nucleus. The liquids and nasals do not interact with preceding ablauting vowels; in the *∅*-grade, where some other Indo-European languages have syllabic sonorants, Germanic inserts a *u*, yielding *ur, um*, etc. The ablaut patterns of the six traditional classes of Germanic strong verbs are shown in Table 9.2.

**Table 9.2 Ablaut patterns of Germanic strong verbs**

```tsv
Class	(1) <span class="sc">inf</span>	(2) <span class="sc">1/3sg pst ind</span>	(3) <span class="sc">1pl pst ind</span>	(4) <span class="sc">pp</span>
I	-ei-	-ai-	-i-	-i-
II	-eu-	-au-	-u-	-u-
III	-e-	-a-	-u-	-u-
IV	-e-	-a-	-ē₁-	-u-
V	-e-	-a-	-ē₁-	-e-
VI	-a-	-ō-	-ō-	-a-
```

The remaining strong verbs are usually grouped together in a Class VII, but they do not really constitute a coherent class comparable to I-VI. These are the verbs with reduplication in Gothic. In West and North Germanic, they all follow a (1)=(4)≠(2)=(3) pattern like Class VI.

The ablaut distinction between (2) and (3) in Classes I–V has been largely leveled in all of the modern (standard) languages except Icelandic and Faroese. English *was–were* is an isolated relic. Dutch has a more systematic holdover in verbs from Classes IV and V, where the <span class="sc">pst sg</span> has short *a* and the <span class="sc">pst pl</span> long *aː* (the regular reflex of PGmc *ē₁*). This ablaut alternation probably owes its survival to reanalysis as open-syllable lengthening (Fertig 2005). There is considerable variation – across languages and within individual languages – as to which vowel has won out in the leveling of the (2)–(3) distinction. In English *sing–sang–sung* (Class III, with *e* > *i* raising before a nasal), the *a* of (2) has prevailed, whereas in *spin–spun–spun*, we have the *u* of (3). There is variation and uncertainty among English speakers for several verbs of this class, e.g., *shrank*~*shrunk*.

The tidy picture in Table 9.2 is a reconstruction that does not correspond to any attested language. The older languages already had subclasses and exceptions, mostly attributable to conditioned sound changes. The modern languages show further splintering of some classes and consolidation of others. Generally, the (sub)classes that were relatively large and homogeneous in the older languages have remained robust, while the small classes have gotten even smaller. Two classes that have fared well in many of the modern languages are Class I and the subset of Class III with stem-final nasal + consonant. Class I is represented in modern English by about 12 verbs, 6 of which have vowels reflecting ablaut grades (1), (2) and (4) (*drive–drove–driven*), while the others have grades (1), (3) and (4) ( [[page 208]] *bite–bit–bitten*) or use the vowel of (2) for both the <span class="sc">pst</span> and the <span class="sc">pp</span> (*shine–shone*). Class I has done even better in Swedish (28 members), German (39), and Dutch (51). The subset of Class III with e > i/____N is the largest of all strong classes in modern English. Between the *sing–sang–sung* and the *spin–spun–spun* patterns, present-day English counts 21 verbs. Modern German has 19 that all follow the *i–a–u* pattern, Swedish 22, and the corresponding class in Dutch 25. Class II has remained strong in several modern languages. Its two largest subclasses have 15 and 11 members in Swedish, 22 and 3 in German, and 23 and 12 in Dutch. In English, by contrast, this class has nearly disappeared. Of the handful of former members that have not been completely lost or regularized, no two follow the same pattern: *freeze–froze–frozen; choose–chose–chosen; fly–flew–flown; shoot–shot; lose–lost; creep–crept*.

Once we move beyond these classes, the numbers fall off sharply. In modern Swedish, for example, no other class has more than four members, and most have only one or two. Overall, the number of basic strong verbs in English has been reduced from more than 290 in Old English to about 70 today. Most of the lost verbs – about 120 – have simply disappeared from the language; about half this many have undergone straightforward regularization. The attrition has been much less extreme in some of the other languages (Harbert 2007: 277). Dutch still has about 180 basic strong verbs (Booij 2002: 60–64), German about 170 (Drosdowski 1984: 127), and Swedish more than 100 (Holmes and Hinchliffe 1994: 258–263). Almost all of the regularizations in English occurred between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Outside of this period, the small number of strong→weak changes is roughly matched by movements in the opposite direction, e.g., *dig, ring, stick, string, strive, wear*. Examples of weak→strong changes in other languages include German *weisen–wies–gewiesen* ‘show’; Dutch *schenken–schonk–geschonken* ‘give (as a gift)’; Yiddish *meldn–gemoldn* ‘announce’.

### 9.5.3 Weak Verbs

The basic form of the weak past suffix is *-t-* in German and *-d(-)* in most of the other modern languages, with phonologically conditioned allomorphy as described in Section 9.2 above. Gothic has a morphosyntactically conditioned alternation between two forms of the <span class="sc">pst</span> suffix, with a distribution parallel to that described above for principle parts (2) and (3) of strong verbs (see Table 9.2): *-d-* in the <span class="sc">pst ind sg</span> versus reduplicated *-dēd-* in the remaining finite past forms. No traces of this alternation are present in any North or West Germanic language.

In modern English the weak <span class="sc">pp</span> is systematically identical in form to the weak <span class="sc">pst</span>. This applies both to regular verbs and to those following any irregular weak pattern (*bring, creep, hit, send, have*, etc.). This identity also holds for the largest class of weak verbs in Frisian and Norwegian, e.g., [[page 209]] Frisian *helle* [<span class="sc">1/3sg pst</span>]–*helle* [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘fetched’. Elsewhere, the relationship between the weak <span class="sc">pst</span> and <span class="sc">pp</span> is slightly more complicated. Most Germanic languages have something, at least a *-ə*, following the *-t-* or *-d(-)* suffix in weak finite past forms. The only thing that can follow the dental suffix segment in a weak <span class="sc">pp</span>, by contrast, is an adjectival agreement ending. The “uninflected” form of the weak <span class="sc">pp</span> can generally be derived from the basic <span class="sc">pst</span> form by removing the final <e> (/ə/) and in German and Dutch prefixing *ge-* where conditions allow, e.g., German *machte* [<span class="sc">1/3sg pst</span>]–*gemacht* [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘made’, Swedish *kallade* [<span class="sc">pst</span>]–*kallad* [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘called’. This systematic relationship between the weak <span class="sc">pst</span> and <span class="sc">pp</span> forms generally holds for all classes of weak verbs, including most irregulars, e.g., German *bringen–brachte–gebracht* ‘bring’, Swedish *göra–gjorde–gjord* ‘make, do’ but does break down in a handful of cases, e.g., German *haben–hatte–gehabt* ‘have’, Swedish *säga–sa(de)–sagd* ‘say’. The uninflected form of the <span class="sc">pp</span> plays an important role in West Germanic as it is used in all periphrastic verbal constructions, where North Germanic more often uses the supine.

Several languages have a small set of verbs with weak finite <span class="sc">pst</span> forms but a strong <span class="sc">pp</span>. Some of these are originally strong verbs that have undergone regularization in the <span class="sc">pst</span> only, e.g., German *backen* [<span class="sc">inf</span>]–*back****t****e* [<span class="sc">1/3sg pst ind</span>]–*geback****en*** [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘bake’, Dutch *wreken–wrek****t****e–gewrok****en*** ‘avenge’. A few result from conflation of forms of near-synonymous strong-weak pairs of verbs that had long co-existed, e.g., Dutch *lachen–lach****t****e–gelach****en*** ‘laugh’. There are also cases where (classes of) originally weak verbs have adopted the strong <span class="sc">pp</span> suffix, e.g., Icelandic *telja* [<span class="sc">inf</span>]–*tal****d****i*[<span class="sc">1/3sg pst ind</span>]–*tal****inn*** [<span class="sc">pp</span>] ‘believe’. Many Frisian speakers systematically add *-en* to the participles of otherwise regular weak verbs with stems ending in *t* or *d* (Tiersma 1985: 70). Verbs with strong finite past forms but a weak participle are less common but do occur, e.g., Dutch *vragen–vroeg–gevraagd* ‘ask’.

#### 9.5.3.1 Weak Verb Classes

All of the modern North Germanic languages, in addition to Frisian, have distinct classes of weak verbs. The other modern languages do not have weak verb classes in the same sense, although the irregular weak verbs of English can be grouped into several small classes. In standard German, Dutch, and Yiddish, by contrast, all but a handful of weak verbs follow exactly the same pattern, aside from phonologically predictable differences. The closest thing to a class in these languages is the small set of German verbs with the <span class="sc">prs–pst</span> root-vowel alternation known as *Rückumlaut*, as in *k****e****nnen–k****a****nnte–gek****a****nnt* ‘know’.

In modern North Germanic, there is a general distinction between one large, productive class of weak verbs with a stem-final “thematic” vowel, *-a* or *-e* depending on the language, and two or three smaller classes which lack this vowel. In Icelandic, Faroese, and Swedish, the presence of the thematic vowel is apparent in some <span class="sc">prs</span> forms; it appears in all North Germanic languages in the <span class="sc">pst</span> and the <span class="sc">pp</span>/supine, generally occurring between the [[page 210]] root and the dental suffix (e.g., Swedish *kalla* [inf]–*kall****a****de* [pst]–*kall****a****d* [pp] ‘call’) and thus distinguishing this class from the other weak classes where the suffix is attached directly to the root (Swedish *fylla*–*fyllde*–*fylld* ‘fill’). In some continental North Germanic varieties, the dental suffix itself has been lost in the thematic-vowel class, as it has in modern Frisian. Frisian and the North Germanic languages also have substantial numbers of irregular weak verbs that do not fit neatly into any of the larger classes.

Present-day English has several dozen irregular weak verbs that can be grouped into about eight classes. The largest of these, with about 20 members, is the no-change class – where the basic <span class="sc">prs, pst</span>, and <span class="sc">pp</span> forms are identical, as in *hit*. All of these verbs have stems ending in *t* or *d*. Other classes include: vowel shortening with phonologically regular *-t: creep–crept* (9 members); with phonologically irregular *-t: mean–meant* (8); vowel shortening with no suffix (stem-final *t* or *d*): *feed–fed* (8); stem-final *d→t: send–sent* (6); Rückumlaut (only): *sell–sold* (2). Idiosyncratic (weakly suppletive) weak verbs include: *have–has–had*, *make–made*, *say–says–said*. One weakly suppletive verb that is difficult to categorize is *do–does–did–done*. Historically the *di-* in *did* (and its West Germanic cognates) is a reduplicative prefix.

Formerly regular verbs and loanwords that have joined one of the irregular weak classes in modern English include *kneel, cost, hurt, quit, bet*, and *split*. Among verbs that have varied between regular and irregular weak conjugation for centuries, some – such as *burned~burnt* – have shown an increasing preference for regular forms (*burned*) over recent generations, whereas for others, such as *leaped*~*leapt*, the irregular form has been gaining ground (Davies 2010). English also shows remarkable robustness in one small group of irregular weak verbs that goes back to Proto-Germanic: *bring–brought; buy–bought; seek–sought* (*beseech–besought*); *teach–taught; think–thought*. This group has even attracted a new member in the loanword *catch*. Only Gothic can match present-day English for the number of verbs in this class.

### 9.5.4 Preterite-Present Verbs

The small class of verbs traditionally referred to as preterite-presents, whose finite present forms look more or less like the past-tense forms of ordinary strong verbs, are another characteristic feature of Germanic. The preterite-presents sometimes preserve older properties of the strong <span class="sc">pst</span> pattern that have otherwise been lost in the language, such as the <span class="sc">sg–pl</span> ablaut alternation in German *darf* [<span class="sc">1/3sg ind</span>]*–dürfen* [<span class="sc">1/3pl ind</span>] ‘be allowed to’, Dutch *kan*–*kunnen* ‘can’, etc. The membership of this class overlaps greatly with the semantically/syntactically defined class of modal auxiliaries: *can, may, shall, must*, etc., and this association has strengthened over the centuries as verbs are attracted to or repelled from the class; *will*, for example, was not originally a preterite-present but has [[page 211]] taken on the class’s morphological characteristics in several Germanic languages. Conversely, originally preterite-present verbs such as English *owe* and German *taugen* ‘be suitable’ and *gönnen* ‘not begrudge’ are now conjugated as regular weak verbs. Variation between preterite-present and weak inflection can be found both in original preterite-presents such as English *dare*, Frisian *doare* ‘dare’, *doge* ‘be good’, and in weak verbs that have been partially attracted into the preterite-present class, such as English *need* and German *brauchen* ‘need’ (Wurzel 1989: 145). As mentioned in Section 9.2.2 above, the preterite-presents show <span class="sc">1sg=3sg</span> syncretism in all Germanic languages – older and modern – which is otherwise foreign to the present indicative in every language that preserves any subject agreement inflection at all. In the modern continental North Germanic languages, the class is distinguished by the absence of the present indicative *-(V)r* ending. The preterite-presents formed their <span class="sc">pst</span> in Proto-Germanic by attaching the weak dental suffix directly to the root. The suffix is still present in many cases in the modern languages, e.g., English *shoul****d***, German *soll****t****e*, but has been lost, for example, in cognate forms such as Swedish *skulle*, Dutch *zou*, Frisian *soe*. In a number of cases, the <span class="sc">pst</span> (subjunctive) of modals has undergone some degree of lexicalization, so that it is no longer clear whether speakers regard pairs such as English *may–might* or German *mögen–möchte* as forms of the same lexical item. The English modals have a number of other distinctive properties: They lack participle forms, for example, and cannot be used in any context that calls for a non-finite form (**I’m sorry to must go*). These reflect more recent, English-specific developments. In other Germanic languages, the inflection and syntactic behavior of preterite-presents is more verb-like (Harbert 2007: 287–292).

## 9.6 Derived Verbs

Prefixed verbs such as *become, forget, withdraw* and compound verbs such as *babysit* generally inherit the inflectional properties of the basic verbs from which they are derived. The number of lexicalized prefixed verbs is much larger in some languages, such as German, than it is in English, although if we include productive prefixation with *mis-, out-, over-, under-, re-, un-*, etc., this phenomenon is quite important in English as well. To account for the inflectional properties of such verbs, some linguists propose that the “head” of a morphologically complex word bears and determines its inflection (Booij 2002: 65). In Germanic languages, the head is generally the rightmost morpheme in a lexical stem – be that a derivational suffix or a root.

In the modern West Germanic languages, the primary productive native way of creating new verbs from other parts of speech involves “conversion” or “zero-derivation”, as in English *to fish*, German *fischen*, Dutch *vissen*. Verbs formed in this way are almost always inflectionally regular, at least initially (Pinker 1999: 157–174, Booij, Chapter 11). In [[page 212]] North Germanic languages, productive derivation of new verbs is often understood to involve suffixation of the “thematic vowel” *-a* or *-e* (Andersson 1994: 278, Thráinsson 1994: 142, Allan et al. 1995: 540), although the presence of this suffix is not apparent in all forms in the paradigm, reminding us of the fine line between affixal derivation and conversion.
