---
title: "Migration, Mobility and Language Contact in and around the Ancient Mediterranean"
author: "James Clackson, Patrick James, Katherine McDonald, Livia Tagliapietra, and Nicholas Zair, eds."
date: "2020"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "clackson-ed-2020-migration-mobility-language-contact.epub.zip"
chunk: "Chapter 7"
pages: "156-170"
---

<a id="page_156"></a>

# Chapter 7 The Mamertini in Messina

## Mobility, Migration and Mercenaries

**Contributors:** Nicholas Zair

## Introduction[^1]

The Mamertini are unusual in the ancient world, if not unique, as a group of mercenaries for whom we have both a record in ancient authors of their movements and behaviour (to some extent, and with some variation between authors), and a small number of inscriptions which can be attributed to them partly on linguistic grounds (being written in Oscan in an otherwise Greek-speaking milieu) and partly because some of them explicitly state that they have been erected on behalf of the τωϝτο μαμερτινο ‘the Mamertine people’.[^2]

Our literary sources agree that the Mamertini took control of Messina around 288 BC.[^3] According to Diodorus Siculus, Cassius Dio and Polybius, they were mercenaries who took the city by force, after having initially been welcomed by the people of Messina. Strabo says only that the Mamertini settled there and subsequently prevailed and got control of the city. According to Festus (reporting Alfius’ history of the First Punic War), the Mamertini came to the aid of the people of Messina and were invited to join the community, leading to the community as a whole changing name and becoming known as Mamertini. The Mamertini were Oscan speakers, we are told (implicitly by 

<a id="page_157"></a>

Diodorus Siculus, explicitly by Festus). According to Cassius Dio, Polybius and Strabo they were Campanians. Festus says they were originally from Samnium, but settled in a place called Tauricana before moving on to Messina. Tauricana may perhaps be associated with the Tauriani, an Oscan-speaking people of Bruttium, one of whose towns was called Mamertium (Campanile 1993: 601–4; Crawford 2007: 277).[^4] On the inscriptional side, Crawford et al. (2011) provide seven entries in Oscan for the Mamertini, consisting of part of a coin series with an Oscan legend (Messana 1/nMe 1a, 1b),[^5] a number of examples of tiles stamped with two different legends (Messana 2/tMe 1),[^6] an inscription consisting of a name formula painted onto stucco on a limestone block (Messana 6/Me 4) and three dedicatory inscriptions inscribed on limestone blocks (Messana 7/Me 5; Messana 4/Me 1 and 3; Messana 5/Me 2).[^7] All these date to the third century BC.

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss to what extent the mobility of the Mamertini had an effect on their language use, as far as the inscriptional evidence allows us to judge. On the one hand, it is clear that their migration to Sicily, and perhaps their movement through Southern Italy to get there, brought them into contact (or perhaps closer contact) with speakers of Greek, and it has been claimed that the Mamertine inscriptions provide evidence for accommodation to Greek linguistic practices as a staging point in a retreat from using Oscan and a shift to using Greek alone, whose final date is undetermined, although it presumably took place by the first century BC at the very latest (Crawford 2007). With regard to these features, I will be arguing in each case one of two propositions: either that they cannot be reliably demonstrated actually to be present in the inscriptions, or 

<a id="page_158"></a>

that the feature is not necessarily the result of Greek influence on the Oscan of Messina in particular, as opposed to influence on Oscan more generally. Instead, I will suggest that there is evidence of another sort to be found in the use of spelling and language in the inscriptions, which fits the claims of the historians that the Mamertini were originally from Campania or Samnium rather than from Oscan-speaking communities further south.

## Possible Greek Features in the Inscriptions

One of the Messina inscriptions has been claimed to contain two Greek features. This is Messana 7/Me 5, on which Crawford et al. (2011: 1522) observe ‘the text uses the Greek system of personal name + personal name of the father in the genitive’,[^8] which is to be compared to the usual Oscan sequence of <em>praenomen</em> + <em>gentilicium</em> + <em>praenomen</em> of the father in the genitive, as demonstrated, for example, by **n]ịumsis heírennis niumsieís** (Nola 3/Cm 6) ‘Niumsis Herennis son of Niumsis’. This claim, as we shall see, only stands if it can be demonstrated that there was only a single name before the father’s name in the inscription.

This is almost certain to be the case if the reading implied by the drawing of the inscription in its earliest publication, by Orsi (1916: 195–6), is correct.[^9] This is the reading given by Vetter (1953: n.197a) and by Marinetti and Prosdocimi (1988: 54 n.A71), that is,]α̣ς στεννιηις | [α]π̣πελλουνηις, which would mean ‘-as son of Stennis; of Apollo’. This is because no Oscan <em>gentilicium</em> is known to end in -<em>as</em>, while <em>Maras</em> is a very common <em>praenomen</em>, as pointed out by Nazzari in Orsi’s text (<em>Trebas</em> would also be possible). However, subsequent scholars who have autopsied the inscription are much less certain about the existence of the initial letter. Crawford et al. (2011: 1521–2) read [2–3]ς στεννιηις | [α]π̣πελλουνηις, and add the comment ‘[t]here is no trace of any letter before the first [sigma]’. This reading matches that of Parlangèli (1956), who had presumably seen the inscription, and prints μαρα]ς 

<a id="page_159"></a>

στεννιηις | [απ]πελλουνηις. Tagliamonte (1994: 260; followed by Mastelloni 2005)[^10] prints -?-]-ς στεννιηις | [-?- α]π̣πελλουνηις and observes:

> ‘[s]ul margine di frattura sinistro, all’ altezza di lin. 1, sembrerebbe di intravedere il resto di una lettera, interpretato dai più come un’ asta obliqua, forse pertinente ad un’ α. Lo stato della pietra, la cui superficie in quel punto risulta completamente abrasa, non consente di essere certo di una tale lettura, giacchè potrebbe trattarsi semplicemente di una scheggiatura presente sulla pietra stessa. Non si esclude pertanto l’eventualità di una diversa lettura del resto di lettera, ad es. ι.’
> — (Tagliamonte 1994: 261).[^11]

One might assume that Orsi, as the earliest publisher of the inscription, saw a letter at the start of the first line which has subsequently been further damaged.[^12] However, I and other members of the ‘Greek in Italy’ project saw this inscription on 20 September 2014, and we concluded that there is the possible right-hand stroke of an alpha before the sigma of the first line. This looks identical to the stroke in Orsi’s drawing. But it does not come down to the same level as the other letters of the line, and consequently we are not certain that it is the stroke of a letter rather than damage to the stone, as Tagliamonte suggests. If it is a letter, it is also possible that the stroke is the lower diagonal of a kappa, or even the diagonal of a nu. The latter is less likely, since there is no sign of the right-hand vertical, but the stone has been damaged just at the spot where the vertical would be expected, with the damaged section lying lower against the face of the stone than the following sigma, so it is not impossible that the vertical ran along this 

<a id="page_160"></a>

damaged part. If the name in fact finished in -ις, -ιες, -ες or -νς it could be a <em>gentilicium</em> rather than a <em>praenomen</em>.[^13]

Given that Crawford et al. do not accept a letter before the sigma, their analysis of the inscription as including only a <em>praenomen</em> before the father’s <em>praenomen</em> is presumably due to the absence of room for further letters to the left, which they reckon to be only enough for two to three. This assumes that the first line starts no, or not much, further to the left than the second line, where there are only one-and-a-half letters missing at the beginning (i.e. [α]π̣). This is a reasonable assumption, given that both lines end at the same point. Although there are several examples of Oscan inscriptions with significantly shorter second lines than their first, for example, Pompei 11/Po 7 and Aeclanum 3/Hi 4, generally the second line starts directly below the first line, rather than being indented relative to the first line and finishing directly below the end point of the first line, as would be required here.

However, against the assumption that all we have missing at the start of the first line is a few letters is the fact that there is very little room there for even a <em>praenomen</em>: an abbreviation is possible, but I know of only two praenominal abbreviations which end in <em>-s</em>. These are **ves**(**is**) (Nuceria Alfaterna 9), which contains a name which is not attested anywhere else and which is found on a tile-stamp, and may therefore be <em>ad hoc</em>; and τς (Caulonia 5) which, if the reading is correct, may stand for <em>Trebas</em>, but may not be Oscan at all, and is again on a tile stamp. There are a number of four-letter praenomina, such as μαις (e.g. Numistro 1/Lu 4), αϝες (Petelia 2), **úvis** (e.g. Nuceria Alfaterna 5/Cm 35) and οπις (e.g. Cumae 17), but even these would struggle to fit in the same space as the [α]π̣ in the line below. It cannot be ruled out that there was another block to the left of the one we have, possibly including more text also on line 2, which included a <em>praenomen</em> and the first part of the <em>gentilicium</em>, in which case we would have the standard Oscan name formula in this inscription (as observed by La Regina 2002: 69).

It has also been suggested, by Clackson (2012: 140), that this inscription may show Greek influence in the use of the genitive of 

<a id="page_161"></a>

the god’s name, rather than the dative, which is normal in Oscan inscriptions, and found, for example, in Messana 4/Me 1 and Messana 5/Me 2, to be discussed directly below. He compares cases such as Διὸς Λυκα(ίου) ‘of Zeus Lykaios’ (<em>IG</em> XIV 597, Sicily, perhaps Thermai Himeraiai) and Ἀπόλōνος Λυκ(είου) ἐμί ‘I am of Apollo Lykeios’ (<em>IG</em> XIV 647, Metapontum). But, although it is true that the more usual case for a god as recipient of a dedication in Oscan is the dative, there are a not inconsiderable number of instances of the genitive, in the form of **iúveís lúvfreís** (Histonium 5/Fr 5, bronze weight in the shape of a head and shoulders) ‘of Jupiter Liber’, **herentateis** (Histonium 8, stamped on a bowl) ‘of Herentas’, **fatuveís** (Aeclanum 1/Hi 6, a limestone block, probably the central block of an altar) ‘of Fatuus’; … διωϝηις (Potentia 9/Lu 6, two limestone blocks) ‘of Jupiter’, … διωϝιιας. διομανα[ς] (Potentia 10/Lu 7, limestone block) ‘of the lady of Jupiter, the mistress’.[^14] With the otherwise implied verb ‘to be’ we have **herettates: súm** (Histonium 7/Fr 4, incised and painted onto a bronze key) and **herentateís. súm** (Herculaneum 1/Cm 10, engraved on an altar) ‘I am of Herentas’. It is possible that all these instances are due to Greek influence on Oscan, but if so, there is, at any rate, nothing special about the usage of the genitive of the god’s name at Messina, and it could as well reflect Greek influence on the Mamertines in Campania or Samnium as at Messina itself.

The final suggestion for Greek influence reflects the complicated history of the inscriptions from Messina and their publication. The same inscription is found twice, on two different stones, the first being Messana 4/Me 1, which is almost complete (the edges have been lost between the earliest reports of the inscription and the present day), and the second being Messana 5/Me 2, of which the right-hand side exists but has been cut into two pieces. Messana 4/Me 1 is given by Crawford et al. (2011), working on the basis of autopsy and earlier reading, as στενις καλινις σταττιηις | μαρας πομπτιες νιυμσδιηις | μ̣εδδειξ ουπσενς | εινειμ τωϝτο μαμερτινο | 

<a id="page_162"></a>

αππελλουνηι σακορο ‘Stenis Kalinis son of Stenis, Maras Pompties, son of Niumsdis, magistrates, made (this), and the Mamertine people; sacred to Apollo’.[^15]

The left-hand block of Messana 5/Me 2 was previously read by Reina (1658: 230), who prints ΣΤΕ⋮Ω. ΑΝ̣.. |ΜΑ.. Σ.. Μ. | ΜΕ …. | ΕΙΝΕΙΜΤΩΕΤ | ΑΠΠΕΛΛ. On the basis of this reading and his own autopsy of the right-hand blocks, Parlangèli (1956) reads στε[ν]ω[ις κ]αλι[νις στ]αττιη̣ις | μα[ρας] [πο]μ[πτι]ε̣ς νιυμσδιηις | με[δδιξ ουπ]σενς | εινειμ τωϝτ[ο μ]αμερτινο | αππελλ[ου]νηι σακορο. Crawford et al. (2011: 1517–18) print στε<νις> [κ]α<λ>[ινις σ]ταττιηις | μα[ρα]ς [πο]μ[πτιες] νιυμσδιηις | με[δδειξ ο]υ[πσ]ενς | εινειμ τω<ϝ>τ[ο] μ̣αμερτινο | αππελλ[ο]υ̣νηι σακορο, with the comment on line 1 ‘νις taken for ιω by Reina’ (they follow Parlangèli in also correcting, without comment, Reina’s ΑΝ for ΑΛ and Ε for Ϝ in line 4).

A possible third version of the inscription was published by Buonfiglio Costanzo (1613: 134–5, second edition 1739: 2.134–5)[^16] as follows: ΣΤΕΝΟΙΣ ΚΑΛΕΙΝΙΣ | ΣΤΑΤΤΙΗΗΣ | ΜΑΡΑΣ ΓΟΜΓΤΟΙΕΣ | ΝΙΗΜΣ ΔΙΕΙΙΣ ΜΕΔΔΕΙ ΤΟΥ ΓΣΕΝΣ | ΗΝΟΙΜ ΤΩΕ | ΤΟ ΜΑΜΕΡΤΙΝΟ ΑΓΓΕΛΛΟ | ΥΝΗΙΣ ΑΚΟΡΟ. Use of Γ for Π is probably a mistake of the printer (Parlangèli 1956: 31 n. 4). ΚΛΛΕΙΝΙΣ in Parlangèli is an error for ΚΑΛΕΙΝΙΣ in the original. Based on the second edition, Parlangèli (1956; followed by Rix 2002 as Me 3) printed στενοις καλεινις | σταττιηις | μαρας πομπτοιες | νιημσδιειις | μεδδειξ ουπσενς | ηνοιμ τωϝ|το μαμερτινο αππελλο|υνηι σακορο.

On the basis of his version of this supposed third inscription, now lost, Parlangèli argues that the variation in the spelling of vowels in στενις/στενοις, καλινις/καλεινις, πομπτιες/πομπτοιες, νιυμσδιηις/νιημσδιειις, εινειμ/ηνοιμ is due to the fact that the writer of the inscription was a Greek speaker for whom the sounds represented by these letters in Greek were by this time homophonous, or beginning to become homophonous (Parlangèli 1956: 37).

It is hard to know exactly what dialect of Greek the putative writer of the inscription in Messina in the third century BC was 

<a id="page_163"></a>

speaking. If it were Koine, it is indeed likely that the Classical (Attic) /eː/ and /iː/ had merged in terms of vowel quality (leading to confusion of <ει> and <ι>), and likewise /y/ and /i/ (leading to confusion of <υ> and <ι>). A radical possibility is that they spoke a version of the Koine similar to that proposed by Teodorsson (1978: 94–8; see also Teodorsson 1974: 286–99), who claims that by 350 BC an innovative variety of Attic had already undergone falling together of /eː/, /y/, and /ɛː/ as /i/, resulting in spellings of all of these originally distinct phonemes as <ει>, <υ>, <η> or <ι>. In this variety, the original diphthong /oi/ had become /y/ but had not merged with /i/. According to Teodorsson, this variety existed alongside a more prestigious conservative variety, to which it lost ground from the third century BC onwards, and in which only /eː/ had undergone merger (with /iː/ and /ɛː/ in different contexts). For a minority of speakers of Koine Greek in Egypt around 250 BC he posits a very similar system to the innovative Attic variety, again without merger of old /oi/ and /iː/ (Teodorsson 1977: 251–6).

This picture is largely compatible with that of Mayser and Schmoll (1970: 49–54, 60–5, 80–2, 87, 89–91) in that they identify frequent confusion between <ει> and <ι>, and between <οι> and <υ>, alongside occasional confusion of <ει> and <η>, and, especially in the second century onwards, <η> and <ι>; but they are doubtful of the evidence for confusion of <η> or <ι> with <υ>. Horrocks (2010: 168–9; see also 115, 117–20) emphasises the relative infrequency of the <ει> ~ <η> ~ <ι> ~ <υ> ~ interchanges and argues that overlap took place between /iː/ and /ɛː/ and between /y/ and /i/ originally only in specific phonetic environments and may also reflect the influence of second-language speakers of Greek. He dates the final loss of these distinctions to the ninth or tenth centuries AD (in educated speakers).

On this basis, therefore, the variation between <ι> and <ει> (in καλινις/καλεινις), <ει> and <η> (in εινειμ/ηνοιμ and νιυμσδιηις/νιημσδιειις), and <υ> and <η> (in νιυμσδιηις/νιημσδιειις) could have an explanation in Koine developments of the period. But even if we take the most radical view of the Koine sound system of the third century, there is no suggestion that /oi/, even if it had already become /y/, had fallen together with /i/, which would be 

<a id="page_164"></a>

required to explain the <ι>, <ει> and <οι> variation in στενις/στενοις, πομπτιες/πομπτοιες, εινειμ/ηνοιμ.[^17] This linguistic point is to be added to the arguments made by Crawford (2006) in favour of the view that there was no third version of the inscription, and that the very different readings in the third version are instead the result of misreading and misinterpretation by Buonfiglio Costanzo of Messana 4.

To sum up this section, therefore, none of the features of the inscriptions from Messina which have been claimed to show Greek influence can be relied upon. In all likelihood the missing ‘third’ inscription, with the same content as, but very different spelling from, Messana 4/Me 1 and Messana 5/Me 2 is non-existent. Given the loss of the left-hand side of Messana 7/Me 5, it is possible that the extant name formula was of the standard, longer, Oscan type rather than the Greek type with only a single personal name and father’s name. The genitive of the god’s name in Messana 7/Me 5 may reflect Greek influence on Oscan, but if so this is not a unique occurrence in Messina, since we find other instances of the genitive also in inscriptions from the mainland, including Campania and Samnium, the ultimate origin of the Mamertini.

## Features Characteristic of the Oscan of Campania and Samnium

I have previously argued that the inscriptions from Messina show a number of features that are characteristic of the spelling of Oscan in the Oscan, rather than the Greek, alphabet (Zair 2016: 136–41). The most obvious of these is νιυμσδιηις in Messana 4/Me 1 and Messana 5/Me 2, where <ιυ> represents the result of an original *<em>u</em> after a coronal (<em>d</em>, <em>n</em>, <em>s</em>, <em>t</em>). In Campania and Samnium (henceforth ‘the North’) *<em>u</em> in this environment is almost always spelt <**iu**>, probably representing a development to [ju], while in Lucania and Bruttium (henceforth ‘the South’) *<em>u</em> after a coronal became [y], which is spelt in the Greek alphabet in use in these areas with <ο>, <ου> or <υ> (for further details see Zair 2014 and 

<a id="page_165"></a>

2016: 74–9). The spelling <ιυ> in Messana 4/Me 1 and Messana 5/Me 2 of *<em>u</em> after a coronal therefore diverges from the spelling used in all other inscriptions in the Greek alphabet, but finds an exact parallel in that commonly found in the Oscan alphabet in Campania and Samnium. Presumably the Mamertini also shared with the Oscan speakers of these areas the dialectal treatment of *<em>u</em> after a coronal as [ju] rather than the [y] found further south.

Another feature which is reminiscent of the Oscan alphabet is the spelling of the sequence /ms/ in νιυμσδιηις as <μσ>. In all definite instances of this sequence in the inscriptions written in the Greek alphabet from outside Sicily, we find the spelling <μψ> which represents the insertion of subphonemic [p] in the sequence /ms/, exactly as in English <em>hamster</em> [hæmpstə]. Since this is such a natural change, it presumably took place also in the Oscan of Campania and Samnium, but here we always find spellings like **niumsis** (Cumae 8.2/Cm 14), which do not write the [p], matching what we find in Messina.

Lastly, the inscriptions from Messina also show a couple of features which are occasionally found in other Greek-alphabet inscriptions, but which are assumed also to be due to the influence of the Oscan alphabet, since they do not reflect standard Greek spellings (these tend to be found in Lucania, nearer to the Oscan-alphabet-using areas, rather than Bruttium, which is further away). One of these is the use of double letters to represent long vowels, as shown by the tile stamp πααπ̣[-?-] (Messana 8/tMe 2) ‘Pāpis’. This usage is not found elsewhere in the Greek alphabet before c. 200 BC, so it is likely to reflect direct knowledge of the conventions of the Oscan alphabet in Messina. The other is the use of the sequence <κσ> and <πσ> rather than <ξ> and <ψ> to write /ks/ and /ps/ in [μ]αμερ̣εκς (Messana 6/Me 4) ‘Mamerex’ and ουπσενς (Messana 4/Me 1) ‘they made’ (but note that <ξ> is used in μ̣εδδειξ Messana 4/Me 1).

Another possible case of a linguistic feature which may reflect the origins of the Mamertini in the North is the use of the main verb ουπσενς (Messana 4/Me 1), ο]υ[πσ]ενς (Messana 5/Me 2) ‘they made’. In building and dedicatory inscriptions of this type, which commemorate the magistrates who were in charge of the building or setting up of the edifice, altar and so on, there are a rather limited 

<a id="page_166"></a>

number of formulas attested in inscriptions from Lucania and Bruttium. The most common formula is the earliest attested and is found predominantly in the fourth and third centuries BC (although there is a single example from the second century in Potentia 3/Lu 8). This simply omits a verb altogether, as in Numistro 1/Lu 4, a yellow sandstone block dated to between 300 and 275 BC which reads μαις αρρι|ες σουϝεν | μεδδικεν ‘Mais Arries in his term of office as <em>meddix</em> (built this)’ (other examples are Crimisa 1/Lu 23, Crimisa 2/Lu 24 and Potentia 39, which is in Greek). The next most common formula, found from the third century onwards, uses the verb α(τ)fαμα-:

> [−?−]+[−?−] | [−?−]υ̣ϝι εκς λεκ(?) σε[νατηις ταν]|[γιν]ο<δ> ατfαματτενς (Cosilinum 1/Lu 3) ‘[−?−] to Jupiter (?); thus??? by [decree of the] se[nate] they had (this) made’.
> λωϝκις. νανονις. σπελληις | κϝαιστορ. σενατηις | τανγινοδ. αfααματεδ | διωϝηις (Potentia 9/Lu 6) ‘Loukis Nanunis, son of Spells, quaestor, by decree of the senate had (this) made; of Jupiter’.
> λωϝκις. νανονις. σπελλ[ηις] | κϝαιστορ. σενατηις | τανγινοδ. αfααμα[τεδ] | διωϝιιας. διομανα[ς] (Potentia 10/Lu 7). ‘Loukis Nanunis, son of Spells, quaestor, by decree of the senate had (this) made; of the lady of Jupiter, the mistress’.
> … σεγονω. αιζνιω. ρεγο(μ) | (ο)πσανω. ειν(ειμ). σταβαλανο | σενατηις. (τ)ανγινοτ. αfαματετ | ειζιδομ. πρωfατεδ … (Potentia 1/Lu 5) ‘… by decree of the senate, had bronze statues of the kings made and fixed in place; the same person passed the work as completed …’.
> The last formula is found in a single inscription of around 150 BC, and uses the verb δεδενς ‘they gave’: [-?-]ς διριος. μαραδ(ηις). ν[-?-] | [-?- σενα]τηις τανγινοδ τρειβ[ωμ εκακ] | [ωπσανναμ] δεδενς μαραhις κε[πιες πρωfαττεδ] (Atina Lucana 1/Lu 2) ‘-s Diris and -s Diris, sons of Maras, N[-?-], by decree of the senate gave [this] building [to be constructed], Marais Ke[pis passed (it) as completed]’.

There are clear differences of phraseology between the South and North parts of the Oscan-speaking area in inscriptions of this type. Thus, the verb **aamanaf-**, which is frequent in inscriptions of this type in Campania and Samnium, does not appear in Lucania and Bruttium. An example is Pompei 11/Po 7: **ni**(**umsis**)**. trebiis. tr**(**ebieís**)**. med**(**dís**)**. túv**(**tiks**) | **aamanaffed** ‘Niumsis Trebiis son of Trebis, magistrate of the people, had (this) made’ (it is also found in Pompei 8/Po 6, Pompei 20/Po 9, Pompei 21/Po 4, Pompei 23/Po 14, Teruentum 15/Sa 11, Teruentum 17/Sa 12, Teruentum 21/Sa 8, Teruentum 33/Sa 9 and Teruentum 36/Sa 2). 

<a id="page_167"></a>

Neither, apart from at Messina, does <em>ops-</em> appear as the main verb, which is found twice at Pompeii:

> … **ekass. ví**|**ass. íní**(**m**). **vía**(**m**). **íúviia**(**m**). **dekkvia**|**rím**. **medíkeís. púmpaiianeís** | **serevkidimaden. uupsens … (**Pompei 13/Po 1) ‘… They built these roads and the Jovian road and the <em>dekkviaris</em> road under the authority of the Pompeian magistrate …’.[^18]
> **m**(**ina**)**z. avdiis. klí**(**pieís**).| **dekis. seppiis. úpf**(**alleís**). | **kvaízstur. upsens.** (Pompei 19/Po 8) ‘Minats Audiis son of Klepis and Dekis Seppiis son of Opfal, quaestors, built this’.

Of course, the absence of these types from Lucania and Bruttium may simply be a reflection of the smaller amount of material from the South, so that we do not have such a range of formulas preserved, rather than a difference in the terminology used. And indeed we do find formulas of the type found in Atina Lucana 1/Lu 2, using the verb ‘to give’ with a gerundive, elsewhere; for example, in Pompei 24/Po 3, which reads … **v**(**ibis**). **viínikiís. m**(**a**)**r**(**aheís**). **kvaísstur. púmp**|**aiians. trííbúm. ekak. kúmben**|**nieís. tanginud. úpsannam** | **deded** … ‘Vībis Vīnikies son of Maras, Pompeian quaestor, gave this building to be made by decision of the assembly’.[^19] Nor is the verb <em>ops-</em> entirely unknown in the official inscriptions from Lucania, since it is found in the gerundive in (ο)πσανω in Potentia 1/Lu 5 (from the second century BC).

However, there is one instance where a difference between the phraseology of the official formulas used in the South and North parts of the Oscan-speaking area is probably meaningful, since the same basic verb is used in both areas, but with the addition of a preverb in the South: α(τ)fαμα-, meaning something like ‘give the order (that something be made)’, is only found in Lucania, while in Campania and Samnium the same verb without the preverb is used (**faama**-, in Aeclanum 4/Hi 1 and Teruentum 12/Sa 13. It is also found, but in a different context, in Pompei 2/Po 34, Pompei 3/Po 35 and Pompei 4/Po 36). Consequently, it is possible that the absence of <em>ops-</em> as a main verb in the South is not a coincidence, and that its usage at Messina is part of the broader 

<a id="page_168"></a>

picture of language and writing there which is more akin to that used in Campania and Samnium than further South.

The final way in which the Mamertini may have used language in a manner more associated with Oscan speakers of the North rather than the South is in respect to coin legends. There are twenty-three series of bronze coins of the Mamertini at Messina, on which the legend is usually in Greek, reading μαμερτινων (Messana 1) ‘of the Mamertini’. On part of a single series, dated to around 225 BC, the legend is in Oscan, reading μαμερτινουμ (Messana 1/nMe 1a-b) ‘of the Mamertini’. As stressed by McDonald (2015: 204–11), the minting of coins on behalf of Oscan-speaking communities was primarily carried out by Greek-speaking craftsmen, and in the South the legends are almost uniformly in Greek rather than Oscan, where it is possible to tell the difference (she lists another nine series with Oscan ethnics in Greek morphology). The single exception is the case of the bronze coinage datable to 207–204 BC bearing the Oscan legend λουκανομ (Lucani 1/nLu 1) ‘of the Lucanians’ beside Greek λυκιανων and indeterminate λουκα (Lucani 1), which is a group apparently struck by the Brettii for the Lucanians who were fighting alongside them on behalf of Hannibal (Crawford et al. 2011: 48–9). It is possible that the emergence of the Oscan language on this coinage somehow reflects the rather atypical situation for its production. At any rate, the Mamertine coinage, being earlier than the Lucanian, is the first instance in the South of Oscan language appearing on coins.

Further north, however, although Greek legends are still common on the coinage of Oscan-speaking communities, we have significantly more Oscan legends on coins from at least the end of the fifth century and hence earlier than the Mamertine issue, such as Campania Coinage 1, Campania Coinage 2, Campania Coinage 4/nSa 4, Fenserni 1 Coinage, Teanum Sidicinum 1 Coinage/nSi 1a, 1b, 1 c, Cubulteria 1 Coinage/nSa 2a, Phistelia 1 Coinage and Aquilonia 1 Coinage/nSa 6.[^20] Once again, therefore, the use of Oscan on the coinage of the Mamertini fits in better with 

<a id="page_169"></a>

the practices of Oscan speakers in the North rather than in the South.

## Conclusion

The relocation of the Mamertini from Campania (or Samnium) to Sicily led to the use of the Greek alphabet by the group as almost the only medium for writing the Oscan language in Messina.[^21] However, it did not immediately result in the abandoning of Oscan as a language, and we find it used for a small number of official and unofficial inscriptions. The orthography and official formulas of these inscriptions, along with the use of Oscan as well as Greek on coin legends, most closely match that of the communities in Campania and Samnium. It seems unlikely that this usage was intended as a means of marking out the Mamertini as Oscan speakers of Campania or Samnium, as opposed to Lucania or Bruttium. The spellings reminiscent of the Oscan alphabet inscriptions seem to represent a natural carrying over of orthographic rules from an old alphabet when a new one is adopted, rather than any explicit rejection of habits in the South, of which the Mamertini may not have been aware (even if they spent some time among the Tauriani in Bruttium), and which are in any case far less standardised than in the North. The same goes for the formulaic language of the Mamertini. The brief addition of coinage bearing an Oscan-language inscription to a series otherwise showing Greek may have been driven by some kind of desire to assert an Oscan-speaking identity, especially since, if the dating is correct, it appears some sixty years after the Mamertini arrived in Messina, but we cannot know the precise details.

This kind of assertion of identity has been suggested to lie behind the fact that the inscription of Messana 6/Me 4 is painted onto stucco. According to Crawford (2007: 274; Crawford et al. 2011: 1520) the stucco is used to replace an original Greek-language text with the present Oscan-language one. A parallel for this would be the similar case of Latin replacing Oscan in 

<a id="page_170"></a>

Pompei 1/Po 54, but there is no evidence of the supposed Greek inscription in this case, and the stucco may have been used to allow writing on the very rough stone; care was evidently taken in the writing of this inscription, which is centred, painted red and well executed.

As stressed at the beginning of this chapter, the combination of historical and inscriptional evidence make the Mamertini an excellent case study for thinking about migration and language contact in the ancient Mediterranean. The writers of the Mamertine inscriptions appear to have known the Oscan alphabet, as demonstrated indirectly by the spelling rules they maintained from it and directly by the use of <**d**> on an early coin (mentioned in note 21). However, they made a positive choice to adopt the Greek alphabet, and seem to have been content to be represented by Greek legends on their coinage, apart from the brief series with μαμερτινουμ some decades after their initial take-over of Messina. The use of the Greek alphabet might be seen as an accommodation to local habits, although the content of the inscriptions would have been largely incomprehensible to non–Oscan speakers (who might, however, have recognised the names of the magistrates and the god in the dedicatory inscriptions). On the other hand, they continued to use Oscan, for a little while at least, for both official and private inscriptions, and there is no clear evidence for the adoption of Greek linguistic habits with regard to onomastics, orthography or case usage in these inscriptions. Instead there is some evidence for the continuation of specifically Campanian or Samnite features in the inscriptions.

Pending any further inscriptional discoveries, the evidence suggests that the Mamertini maintained for some time habits of formulaic language and orthography of the sort we might expect given their origins in Campania or Samnium – perhaps for a few decades or a couple of generations. There is no evidence for linguistic changes to their Oscan resulting from contact with Greek speakers, as opposed to the adoption of the Greek alphabet. Instead, presumably, because they settled in Messina, a fairly rapid switch to Greek took place, with the result that Oscan died out among the Mamertini, at least as a written language, by the end of the third century BC.

## Notes
