---
title: "Migration, Mobility and Language Contact in and around the Ancient Mediterranean"
author: "James Clackson, Patrick James, Katherine McDonald, Livia Tagliapietra, and Nicholas Zair, eds."
date: "2020"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "clackson-ed-2020-migration-mobility-language-contact.epub.zip"
chunk: "Chapter 10"
pages: "230-267"
---

<a id="page_230"></a>

# Chapter 10 HOC PRIMVS VENIT

## Italians and Others in Egypt before the Caesars

**Contributors:** Patrick James

Some accidents of preservation, reuse, discovery, and publication are fascinating. It so happens that the earliest Latin inscription known from Egypt claims, it seems, that, on 26 August 116,[^1] one Acutius[^2] was the first (Italian or writer of Latin) to reach the sanctuary of Isis on the island of Philae in Upper Egypt and to leave a legible mark in Latin (<em>I.Syène</em> 321). For him to be able to make such an absolute claim, we must assume that no Latin was visible amid the many Greek inscriptions then at Philae and that there were no indications of Italians in those Greek inscriptions. If others had preceded him without leaving written evidence, they were as invisible to Acutius as they are to us. Or, Acutius may have made a relative claim: to be the first, in some respect, in relation to those who accompanied him that day and also incised their names. We can only speculate about just how competitive Acutius was in relation to his companions.

The inscription, in fact, consists of one Greek graffito in Greek script and of three Latin graffiti in Roman script. The content of the Greek partially overlaps with the first Latin graffito to form a bi-version bilingual of a kind. The texts are presented below as they appear on a block that seems to have been part of a Ptolemaic structure at Philae, was reused as part of the western exterior wall, and whose inscription was discovered in 1976. The edition is that by André Bernand (1989: 303–4 and Plate 154.2), but with interpuncts present and abbreviations left unresolved.

<a id="page_231"></a>

| <em>ACV</em>[<em>TI</em>]<em>VS</em> [—] <em>F</em>·<em>TER</em>̣<em>HOC</em>·<em>VENIT</em>·<em>PRIMVS</em><em>A</em>·<em>D</em>·<em>V</em>·<em>K</em>·<em>SEPTEMBRIS</em><em>Q</em>·<em>FABIO</em>·<em>C</em>·<em>LICINIO</em>·<em>COS</em>ΓΑΙΟΣΑΚΟΥΤΙΟΣ | <em>M</em>·<em>CLAVDIVS</em>·<em>VARVS</em><em>SP</em>·<em>VARAEVS</em>·<em>N</em>·<em>F</em><em>HOC</em>·<em>VENERVNT</em><em>A</em>·<em>D</em>·<em>V</em>·<em>K</em>·<em>SEPTEM</em>·<em>COS</em><em>ROMAE</em>·<em>Q</em>·<em>FABIO</em>·<em>C</em>·<em>LI</em> |
| --- | --- |

> Acutius son of [— – —] TER[^3]arrived here firston the twenty-sixth of Augustwhen Q(uintus) Fabius and G(aius) Licinius were co(n)s(uls).Gaios Akoutios.
> M(arcus) Claudius Varus
> Sp(urius) Varaeus son of Numeriusthey came here[^4]on the twenty-sixth of Augustwhen Q(uintus) Fabius and G(aius) Licinius were co(n)s(uls) at Rome.

The nature of Acutius’ claim to be <em>primus</em> is not clear, given that others came with him to Philae on that same day. A key piece of the puzzle is the value of TER. An indication of tribal affiliation, <em>Ter(entina tribu)</em>,[^5] which would emphasize the Italian origin of Acutius with greater specificity than an ethnic, would be very unusual by this date. On the other hand, the <em>cognomen</em> Ter(tius)[^6] would balance that of Marcus Claudius. J. E. Bingen has argued[^7] against TER being an abbreviation on the basis of the space that follows and because Acutius must be distinguishing himself from the others at Philae with him that same day by being the first of the group to come to Philae three times.

The purpose of Acutius’ visit to Philae with his companions remains uncertain. The precise date provides clues about why these three men had come to Philae. Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II 

<a id="page_232"></a>

had died less than a month earlier, and late August was the time of the festivities related to the high point of the surge of the Nile reaching Philae. On the basis of the first of these coincidences, we may speculate that their presence was related to international relations and current affairs, at least in part. The second coincidence suggests religious or cultural tourism as the specific motive for this visit to Philae.[^8] We may expect any visit to Philae to have a religious dimension, but, as noted by J. Lea Beness and Tom Hillard (2003: 206), this inscription does not mention any act of <em>proskynema</em> to Isis, unlike inscriptions at Philae in general. Also, the particular date and year become less important for the interpretation, if this visit was not the only one that Acutius ever made, but the third. The dates of his earlier visits are lost to us, but, if Acutius had already come to Philae repeatedly, we have every reason to suspect that he would do so again regularly and not necessarily for a single purpose. As Beness and Hillard (2003) noted repeatedly, commercial motives would be compatible with the other purposes, such as sacred tourism or a diplomatic mission, that have been proposed for this particular visit or for Acutius coming to Egypt in general.

These three men all left their mark in Latin and in Latin script and from a Roman perspective. The year was indicated by the consular formula and the day and month by the Roman calendar, with a Roman numeral, rather than by either or both of the Egyptian and Macedonian calendars in use at Philae. Spurius Varaeus added that Quintus Fabius and Gaius Licinius were consuls <em>at Rome</em>, announcing the group’s ‘distant provenance’ and ‘cultural perspective’.[^9] Only Acutius made a partial concession to Greek-reading visitors to Philae: his <em>nomen</em> was transcribed into Greek script (with Greek morphology) with the addition of his <em>praenomen</em>, omitted, it seems, from the Latin.[^10] His companions 

<a id="page_233"></a>

indicate their filiation. Of the three, however, only Marcus Claudius Varus certainly gave his <em>tria nomina</em>. If TER is an abbreviation for <em>Tertius</em>, the <em>tria nomina</em> of Gaius Acutius Tertius can be assembled from the Greek and Latin texts.[^11] It is certain that the name of his father was included.

The ‘tone’ of this Latin inscription distinguishes it from the rest of the inscriptions at Philae. The absence of any reference to Isis or any other indication of cult activity has already been mentioned. Although the verb ‘come’ recalls the verb ἥκω of Greek inscriptions at Philae, this inscription contains two third-person forms, <em>uenit</em> and <em>uenerunt</em>. However, at Philae the first-person singular is the norm.[^12] <em>I.Syène</em> 323, another Latin inscription at Philae, thought to be contemporary with <em>I.Syène</em> 321, shows the expected first person <em>ueni</em>:

> <em>M</em>(<em>arcus</em>) <em>Tiṇọtrius</em> <em>N</em>(<em>umeri</em>) <em>f</em>(<em>ilius</em>)
> <em>Graicanius</em>
> <em>Nucrinus</em>
> <em>ueni</em>.

> I, M(arcus) Tiṇọtrius Graicanius, s(on of) N(umerius), of Nuceria, visited.

(As Bernand (1989: 307) noted, the ethnic <em>Nucrinus</em>[^13] here is that of Nuceria in Campania, and his <em>cognomen</em>, <em>Graicanius</em>, must be derived from <em>Graecus</em> and indicate Greek associations of some kind.) The combination of Latin and a third-person verb in later inscriptions on the Colossus of Memnon was noted to have ‘a certain detachment’ by J. N. Adams (2003a: 549 and 551), who concluded that it conveys a ‘public or official voice’ in contrast to the ‘literary voice’ of the first-person verbs in the Greek verses that accompany third-person Latin statements of facts and details.

<a id="page_234"></a>

This inscription is a convenient entry point for this study of the linguistic vestiges of Romans and Italians in Egypt before it became the Roman province of <em>Aegyptus</em>. It testifies that Romans were present in Egypt and as far as south as Philae by the end of the second century. However, we are left uncertain about who these Romans were and why and how often they came to Philae. Still, the inscription remains remarkable as a statement of primacy, in Latin with only Greek Γάϊος Ἀκούτιος as the slightest concession to those unable to read Latin or understand Roman dates. It is assumed that there would be subsequent Latin-reading visitors to see it, while for others, unable to read its Latin, its Latin majority had a symbolic function, announcing a non-Greek and non-Egyptian presence at the sanctuary. More questions are raised than the inscription itself answers, both about its context and, more generally, about Romans and Italians in Ptolemaic Egypt. This study is concerned with the epigraphic, the papyrological, and, chiefly, the onomastic evidence that may be brought to bear to address such questions.

## Methodology and Problems with the Evidence

As scholars writing on Latin in Egypt have noted, ‘Latin did not arrive only with the conquest’ (Evans 2012: 516) and there must have been ‘numerous Latin speakers who came to Egypt’, ‘numerous Egyptians who travelled to Latin-speaking areas’, and ‘contact with Romanized Greeks’ from outside Egypt (Dickey 2010: 219–20). There are almost no Latin texts from Ptolemaic Egypt: the two inscriptions at Philae that we have already considered, two-and-a-half graffiti among the thousands from the Syringes at Thebes and a Greek inscription followed by a short Latin addition (<em>OGI</em> 1.129). That is the whole corpus of Latin from Ptolemaic Egypt published so far. This entire corpus is examined in this study. A Greek inscription from the end of the Ptolemaic period (<em>I.Philae</em> 1.63) contains the sole Ptolemaic attestation of a Latin loanword. Otherwise, the few occurrences of loanwords in the first century are restricted to the Augustan decades of that century and then to just two documents: <em>P.Oslo</em> 

<a id="page_235"></a>

2.26 (5–4 BCE: Oxyrhynchus) and <em>SB</em> 6.9223 (2 BCE: Oxyrhynchus).[^14]

The purpose of this study is to test how we can identify and situate any Latin speakers, or, indeed, Italians besides those from predominantly Greek-speaking areas, throughout the Ptolemaic period on the basis of onomastic data and ethnics attested in Greek and Demotic texts.

All foreign (non-Egyptian) ethnics in Ptolemaic Egypt were collected by Csaba La’da (2002). Individual bearers of Italian names have been identified and catalogued for the <em>Prosopographia Ptolemaica</em> (Peremans et al. 1950–81) and, in relation to the Zenon Archive, by W. Pestmann (1981). Then, on the basis of the <em>Prosopographia Ptolemaica</em>, a study of the evidence for relations between the Romans and the Ptolemies by Peremans and Dack (1972) identified around seventy-five individuals by their ethnics. E. Van ‘t Dack (1980 and 1983) also digested the prosopographic evidence for migration and mobility from Italy to Egypt but concentrated on the Roman army in Ptolemaic Egypt (in the years 55–30). In addition to these works, I have carefully reviewed all attestations of names in the Trismegistos People database that are dated before 1 CE and that are neither securely Greek nor securely Egyptian.[^15] In this way, this study is also an experiment in what can be done with the onomastic data in Trismegistos.[^16]

<a id="page_236"></a>

Personal names and ethnics alike are problematic as means of identifying Italians and speakers of Latin and Italic languages. The relationship between the name of an individual and the language(s) that they use is not straightforward. For example, the earliest Latin documentary papyri written are letters between individuals with Greek names, largely about individuals with non-Latin names, and thus demonstrate that a Greek name is not necessary evidence that a person only ever wrote or read Greek. Diaconus wrote to Macedo (<em>SB</em> 20.15139 (19 July 5–2 BCE)) and mentioned a Nireus (dative singular <em>Nireo</em>: line 8), but also Iucundus, Didius, and a freedman of a Domitius. (The only Greek written in the letter is the Egyptian date given after the Roman date.) A Suneros wrote to a Chios about a Theo (Θέων) and Epaphras (<em>P.Oxy</em>. 44.3208 [Augustan]). If we had only the names of these individuals and not these Latin texts, we would have no basis to conclude that they spoke or wrote Latin or understood written or spoken Latin. Indeed, a man with the Latin name <em>Bassus</em> wrote in Greek (<em>P.Ryl</em>. 4.603 [16.8.7]) either because he was illiterate in Latin or because he chose to write Greek either for reasons of his own or for the sake of Heracleides and Tryphon, his Greek-named and, perhaps, not Latin-reading correspondents at Oxyrhynchus.

It is not always easy, or even possible, to distinguish a personal name from an ethnic. In particular, we cannot tell whether Ποντία in <em>GVI</em> 1002.2 (150–30: almost certainly from Naucratis) is the feminine Greek ethnic ‘of Pontos’, perhaps as a Greek personal name,[^17] or <em>Pontia</em>, the feminine form of <em>Pontius</em>, the Latin <em>nomen</em> of her father. As a further alternative, this Pontia may have been given her (Greek) name after a Nereid (‘Lady of the Sea’).[^18] This epitaph of Apollos, son of Leon, begins κούρη Νικομάχοιο Λέοντί με τίκτεν Ἀπολλῶν | Ποντία: ‘Pontia, daughter of Nicomachos, bore me, Apollos, to Leon’. The noun κούρη ‘girl, daughter’ either has the mother’s name Ποντία in apposition (and enjambment) or is qualified by an ethnic adjective ‘of Pontos’. If Ποντία is an ethnic adjective, the mother of Apollos was not from Naucratis or even Egypt. The same might well be true if Ποντία instead proved 

<a id="page_237"></a>

to be an ethnic as a personal name. The designation ‘a young woman from Pontos’ may have been used in order to avoid naming a respectable woman in public, if not to stress her origins for some reason unknown to us. In any case, it is impossible to be sure in a specific instance about the reasons for the presence of an ethnic or the absence of a personal name, even when there are parallels to consider and especially so in the case of a highly personalised metrical epitaph. However, it is clear that, since her father’s name is given as <em>Nicomachos</em>,[^19] it is unlikely that Ποντία reflects a Latin <em>nomen</em> <em>Pontius</em>, unless this individual was known as Nicomachos in Greek, but also by the Latin name <em>Pontius</em>.[^20] Since the latter remains no more than speculation, it is more likely that Ποντία is a Greek name, or is an ethnic, or is an ethnic as a personal name.

Instances of Ἀττικός are similarly problematic. The <em>cognomen</em> <em>Atticus</em> is clear when it occurs in the <em>tria nomina</em> of Marcus Cottus Atticus (<em>BGU</em> 4.1113 <em>passim</em>). However, the eight-year old Ἀτικος [<em>sic</em>] named on <em>P.Cair.Zen</em>.1.59076.8 (13.5.257), if indeed he was an Ἀττικός,[^21] was involved in migration of a kind, but he was not a Roman with the <em>cognomen</em> <em>Atticus</em>. This letter tells us that he was one of four slave boys of superior quality that Toubias was sending from Judaea to Apollonios at Alexandria (the letter itself was found at Philadelphia). <em>Abydos</em> 114 (Ptolemaic), a graffito on the Memnonion, with a third-person verb, preserves an instance: Ἀττικὸς προσεύχεται | τοῖς ἰ Ἄβυτον (= ἐν Ἀβύδῳ) θεοῖς | ἵνα ὑγιαίνῃ. This could be a <em>cognomen</em> as a Greek single name or the ktetic adjective or ethnic Ἀττικός as a personal name,[^22] from which the <em>cognomen</em> came. In contrast to other graffiti at Abydos that we shall discuss below, this Ἀττικός has neither an ethnic nor a patronymic genitive. We cannot be sure that he was not a Greek named Ἀττικός, perhaps a slave.

We cannot be sure that certain names are not Greek. Latin <em>Lucius</em> was rendered in Greek either as Λούκιος or as Λεύκιος (cf. Gignac 

<a id="page_238"></a>

1976: 216). Some Λεύκιοι, such as Memmius the senator (<em>P.Tebt</em>. 1.33.3), were clearly Romans, while some, such as Λεύκιος Θρᾶιξ λοχαγός (<em>BGU</em> 6.1266.39 and 14.2386.6; cf. Fraser (1972: 170)), clearly were not. The name Λεύκιος, ‘Whitey’, had long been in use in Greek.[^23] In the case of Memmius and others, the Latin name has been assimilated to a similar Greek one, which happens to be related etymologically.[^24] The name Λούκιος does not appear in Greek documents from Egypt until 11.1.14 (Λούκιος Πομπώνιος: <em>BGU</em> 4.1113 <em>passim</em>), except in a much damaged painted funerary inscription that begins Λούκις ME|ṆỴẠ and ends with the remains of a date (<em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 35.1–2; 99–30). However, instances of Λευκι- are found in <em>P.Hib.</em>1.42 (30.12.262), <em>P.Strasb</em>. 8.761v9 (second century), <em>P.Tebt</em>. 3.882 fr. 2 25 (father of Θεοξένα; 26.1 or 24.2 144), <em>SB</em> 1.1658 (c. 260–197: incised on a sepulchral vase from Alexandria), <em>SB</em> 14.11367.1 (τοῦ Θεοφίλου, 260–200: Crocodilopolis), and <em>W.Chr</em>. 110a (10.12.110: Dios Polis), all of which lack any indication that the name is not the Greek name itself (or, indeed, the Greek name as an alias for an Egyptian name). Nothing suggests Italian connections for these Λεύκιοι, while Λεύκιος Κυδωνιάτᾱς in <em>Syringes</em> 385 (332–30), a visitor from Crete, and another visitor from Egypt to Delos, Λεύκιος Ἀθηνοδώρου Ἀλεξανδρεύς (<em>ID</em> 2595.38–9; 24.9.126/22.9.125) certainly were not Italians.

Further, some forms of some names are ambiguous. The genitive Ἀττίου could belong to the Latin name <em>Attius</em> (cf. <em>CIL</em> II 4085 and Persius <em>Satires</em> 1.50) or to Greek Ἀττίας. It is clear from Ἀτ<τ>ίας Θρᾶιξ in <em>BGU</em> 6.1266.39 that Ἀττίου in <em>BGU</em> 6.1266.45 is almost certainly the genitive of Ἀττίας, not of <em>Attius</em>. The genitive Ἀττιου [<em>sic</em>] in <em>SB</em> 24.16272 (fr. i 32, i 36, and vi 237; 275–226; Memphis, Saqqara) is always followed by 

<a id="page_239"></a>

a mark of abbreviation. As such, this is not a genitive, either of <em>Attius</em> or of Ἀττίας.

Some Italians may be concealed by the simplification of double consonants.[^25] The name <em>Annius</em> may be attested in <em>O.Cair</em>. 1.2 (as Ἄνιος, 11.1.150 or 08.1.139) and in <em>P.Hels</em>. 1.29 i 4 (161/160), which reads ὑπ(ὲρ) Ἀ̣ν̣ί̣ου. A Greek name Ἄνιος is doubtful itself.[^26] Trismegistos links from the first Ἄνιος to Ἀμμώνιος, as if it is an abbreviation of Ἀ(μμώ)νιος, and from the second to <em>Annius</em> (TM Nam 8561). We also have to bear in mind the possibility of a Semitic name, <em>Ḥanni</em>.[^27] Instances of names beginning Κασ- present comparable problems. They could represent <em>Cassius</em> or <em>Cassia</em> or a masculine Greek name Κάσιος or Κασίας (formed from an ethnic associated with the Sinai peninsula or with the Greek island of Kasos).[^28] The dative Κασίωι with iota adscript (<em>SB</em> 10.10226.1, second century) could reflect <em>Cassius</em> or Κάσιος and the genitive Κασίου (<em>P.Hamb</em>. 1.57.19 (28.10.160)) could belong either to <em>Cassius</em> or to either Greek name. If <em>P.Hamb</em>. 1.57 does involve an Italian with an Italian name, it shows an Italian as the father of a νησιώτης (an ‘islander’ of some kind) swearing an oath about hunting in the second century. If <em>SB</em> 10.10226 were addressed to a Cassius, an Italian would be shown to have been involved in giving a sum of money to a Psenepathes and in avoiding involvement with another individual with a Κασ- name: καὶ μὴ πα[ρ]ὰ Κασ̣ί̣α̣ | ἔχῃς αὐτ[.].. (lines 5–6). Given these problems, and since the following lines are damaged and the reading Κασ̣ί̣α̣ is uncertain, we cannot say more about the identity of this individual or his[^29] role in this transaction.

<a id="page_240"></a>

Some instances of some Latin names are likely to conceal individuals not of Italian origin. The name <em>Gaius</em> often appears in inscriptions relating religious associations and military units. A list of dedicators from Hermopolis has three men called Gaius (<em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 6.156, 165, and 198 (25.1.78)) in a religious association and in a military context (παρ[ε]φεδρεύοντες ‘serving as guards’: line 2). The three genitive patronymics are Greek names: Ἀλεξάνδρου, Ἰσιδότου, and Ἀπολλωνίου. Another instance of <em>Gaius</em> occurs in the company of οἱ ἱππεῖς as the maker of a dedication to the king (<em>I.Delta</em> 1.892, 1.3 (80–52/51)). The dedication is as enigmatic as it is short. <em>SB</em> 1.681, a report of a decision by a religious association, names two men with the name <em>Gaius</em> among its one hundred and seventy members. The first (64 ii 18) was a son of a Demetrios. The context of the second (143 iv 19 Γάϊο[ς) is lost. In the absence of further information, nothing more can be said, but it is notable that the ‘colourless’ name <em>Gaius</em> is the one that appears in such environments.[^30] However, the most striking feature of these inscriptions is not the colourless name <em>Gaius</em> or the similarly colourless Greek names, like those of the fathers in <em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 6, but the non-Greek names or names with non-Greek associations. <em>SB</em> 1.641 contains Greek names with an Egyptian flavour (e.g. Ἀμμώνιος ii 12, 19, and 20) in addition to many names, such as Κοσάδαρος (i 21, 22, 27, 31 and ii 25; cf. i 4) and Κοσμάλαχος (ii 15 and iii 18; cf. i 17 and 39), built on the stem Κοσ-.[^31] The name Κοσμάλαχος is transparently of Semitic origin and is a compound of <em>Qôs</em>, a theonym among the Idumaeans, and Hebrew <em>mālak</em> ‘king’.[^32] The names Ὀρόντας and Ὀρύντας in 

<a id="page_241"></a>

<em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 5.137 (~ <em>SB</em> 1.4206) and 6.209 (~ <em>SB</em> 5.8066) are of Iranian origin.[^33] Such isolated instances of the name <em>Gaius</em> amid Greek, Egyptian, Iranian, and Semitic names and patronymics suggest either that Italians had been integrated into non-Italian populations, such as the Idumaeans of Egypt, and into their associations, or, as seems more likely in the absence of other evidence in the context, that the name <em>Gaius</em> itself had ‘migrated’ to those populations, a reflection of more distant contact.

Individuals identified by their ethnics or their names as those who may have been Italians will be discussed below in relation to the activities considered in our discussion of Acutius and his companions: ‘sacred’ (or ‘sightseeing’), diplomatic (and military), and commercial. That is not to say that a given Italian only ever had one purpose for being in Egypt or at a particular site at a given time. While so much uncertainty remains about Acutius and his companions because the inscription itself does not mention the purpose(s) of their visit to Philae, other texts, such as <em>I.Philae</em> 1.63, which will be discussed later, do contain an explicit statement of one purpose but also contain indications of status that relate to other activities.

Other texts contain explicit statements of purpose in relation to particular locations, but also suggest that those individuals had other reasons for being in Egypt in general. A letter in the Menches Archive from Tebtunis quotes a letter of instructions about a visit by Lucius Memmius, a Roman senator (<em>P.Tebt</em>. 1.33.3–4 [17.3.112]): Λεύκιος Μέμμιος Ῥωμαῖος τῶν ἀπὸ συνκλήτου.[^34] The explicit purpose of the visit is ‘sightseeing’ (ἐπὶ θεωρίαν: line 6) in the Arsinoite Nome. Preparations (lines 7–16) include those for viewing the labyrinth (τὰ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ λαβυρίνθου θέαν: line 14). Even if Memmius’ own concern in the Arsinoite Nome was tourism, that is not the full picture of his visit or of his reason for being 

<a id="page_242"></a>

in Egypt already (at Alexandria, since his voyage was ἐκ τῆς πόλεως: line 5). Memmius was no ordinary visitor, but a distinguished guest (ἐν μ<ε>ίζονι ἀξιώματι κα[ὶ] τιμῆι | κείμενος: lines 4–5) and his visit to the Arsinoite Nome was a matter of great concern to Asclepiades, no less than the superintendent of revenues (cf. <em>P.Tebt</em>. 1.27 iv 98–9 [27.2.113]), who issued the instructions, and to Horos the royal secretary (cf. <em>P.Tebt</em>. 1.27 ii 27). Horos forwarded the instructions to Eirenaios, if the name has been read correctly,[^35] no less than the <em>dioectetes</em> and <em>syggenes</em> (‘an honorary cousin of the king’; cf. <em>P.Tebt</em>. 1.27 iv 85–6). At each stop he would receive gifts (τὰ ὑπογεγρ(αμμένα) ξένια: line 11), of which the details and value are lost to us. The senator was to be honoured to an exceptional extent (μεγαλο{υ}πρεπέστερον: line 6). The summary instruction (lines 16–19) was to show τὴν μεγίστην φροντίδα and τὴν πᾶσαν σπουδή[ν]. The senator did not come to Egypt solely to visit the sites of the Arsinoite Nome. He was already at Alexandria, for reasons which are unknown, and was to be welcomed with utmost honour.

In other cases, we have clear evidence for migration or mobility, but no information about the duration or purpose of that migration or mobility. A Mamertine (see Tagliapietra and Zair, Chapters 6 and 7 of this volume) was buried in the Hadra cemetery at Alexandria in the second or first century: Μαραῖος Βακείου | Μαμερτῖνος (<em>SB</em> 1.417 f.1–2). The Italic origins of this Maraeus are suggested by his name (Oscan **Maras**) and probably by the name of his father.[^36] However, his burial tells us nothing either about the duration of his time at Alexandria (or in Egypt more widely) or about his reason(s) for being there.

<a id="page_243"></a>

## Italians at Sacred Sites?

The presence of the names and ethnics of Italians at sacred sites does not prove that those individuals visited those sites principally for religious reasons or even for the purpose of ‘sightseeing’ at those sacred sites at all. Several of these attestations are certainly Ptolemaic but cannot be dated more precisely. Some individuals recorded their <em>proskynema</em> mark in Greek: τὸ προσκύνημα. Σερηνός (<em>Abydos</em> 450bis, e) and τὸ προσκύνημα | Σαβείνου Μαρίνου (<em>Abydos</em> 5.1–2 (second century)). Another appears with nothing more than the conventional use of ἥκω: Σαλουτάριος Ἀλεξανδρεὺς ἥκω (<em>SB</em> 1.3772 (dated to 99–1 BCE)). The ethnic of an Alexandrian (and, presumably, a citizen) here follows a Latin <em>cognomen</em>. Others did not explicitly indicate their purpose: Κρίτων Ἀγαθωκλέους Ῥωμαῖος (<em>Abydos</em> 55) and Νικίας Πύρρου, Ῥωμαῖος Ἀρίστομ̣μ̣ος (<em>Syringes</em> 1092), as punctuated by Jules Baillet: Syringe 9, Suite 2, Left wall, Corridor, 1st section, suite a (Ptolemaic period). Here, it is remarkable that, although the ethnic Ῥωμαῖος indicates Italian origins, the personal names do not. Since Baillet’s drawing does not suggest any space, division, or change of inciser between the words, it is particularly unclear whether Ῥωμαῖος belongs with Nicias, or with Aristommos, or is itself a third personal name.

Graffiti in the Syringes at Thebes show indications of identity such as Italian onomastic practice, the ethnic Ῥωμαῖος, and, although rarely, the use of Roman script. As texts these graffiti are silent about the purpose of the visits: their location is the only indication. They are the only Ptolemaic specimens of Latin other than the Acutius inscription at Philae, that of Marcus Tinotrius, and an addition to an inscription incised at the end of the Ptolemaic period, which will be discussed at the end of this chapter. The names <em>Marcos Volturios</em> and <em>Marcos Voturios</em> feature in four graffiti at three locations in two of the Syringes (three times with the ethnic Ῥωμαῖος). It is likely (if these names are in fact identical), that the graffiti refer to the same visitor. However, since the graffiti cannot be dated more precisely than the Ptolemaic period, we cannot exclude the possibility that several bearers of those names visited two of the Syringes at different times during the Ptolemaic centuries. The absence of <em>cognomina</em> is consistent with a date before the first century. The inclusion of a <em>cognomen</em> 

<a id="page_244"></a>

by M(arcus) Claudius Varus at the end of the second century (<em>I.Syène</em> 321), but neither by Gaius Acutius nor by Sp(urius) Varaeus, illustrates that period of transition to increased use of <em>cognomina</em>.[^37] The dossier, based on the edition of Baillet (1920–6), consists of the following four items.

> 283 [Μ. Ου]οτύριος Ῥωμαῖος.
> — (Syringe 2, Suite 6, 2nd door, 2nd section; Plate XI)

> 588 <em>M</em>(<em>arcus</em>) <em>Volturios</em>[^38]
> — (Syringe 2, Suite 18, 2nd section; Plate XXIII)

> 2003 Μάρκος Ὀτούρι[ο]ς | Ῥωμαῖος.
> — (Syringe 9, Suite 34, Right wall; Plate LXXV)

> 2004 <em>M.</em> <em>Voturi</em>[<em>os</em>] | <em>Rωmaios</em>.
> — (Syringe 9, Suite 34, Right wall; Plate LXXV)

The identification of a single Marcos Voturios or Volturios who left his marks at the Syringes is supported by the juxtaposition of 2003 and 2004 on the right wall of Suite 34 of Syringe 9. Together they constitute a bi-version bilingual and should, perhaps, be catalogued as one item. The <em>binomina</em> and ethnic were incised first entirely as Greek in Greek script (2003, the fullest and best preserved of the four graffiti) and second as Latin in Roman script with the <em>praenomen</em> abbreviated (2004), but with a switch into Greek script and, perhaps, with an instance of Greek inflectional morphology in Rωmaios.[^39] (However, since the raising of final [o] to [u] was not yet ubiquitous in the third century, if all these graffiti are that early, -<em>os</em> may be the original Latin spelling.) Even if the use of -<em>os</em> reflects the original Latin ending (as, apparently, in 588), the form of the ethnic itself is Greek Ῥωμαῖος spelled with (Greek) <ai>[^40] (not Latin <ae>), not Latin <em>Rōmānus</em> or <em>Rōmānos</em> (nor, for that matter, <em>Italicus</em>, familiar in the plural at Delos).[^41] 283 and 588, 

<a id="page_245"></a>

both in Syringe 2, but far from adjacent, could similarly be records in both languages of the same Roman visitor.

The <em>Volturius</em> of 588 is the least likely to belong to this dossier. Not only is 588 unquestionably Latin in its script and, probably, in its morphology (-<em>os</em>), it alone contains <l> in its first syllable and it alone lacks an ethnic. Also, the name <em>Volturius</em> may be a different name from <em>Voturius</em> and its Greek representations, if indeed the latter existed.[^42] The presence of <l> in the ‘pure’ Latin graffito (588) and its absence from the Greek texts (283 and 2004) and from the mixed text (2003) could be explained as a very early instance of a phenomenon otherwise only attested in much later Latin: the absorption of ‘dark l’ (/ɫ/) after a back vowel (<ο> in these graffiti).[^43] The inciser(s) would then be working with the Latin that was heard and without familiarity with the standard Latin spelling with <l>. Although Adams (2003a: 622) cited <em>si uut</em> for <em>si</em> <em>uult</em> (<em>O.Wâdi Fawâkhir</em> 3.14 (second century CE), which closely parallels <em>Vot</em>- for <em>Volt</em>-, such absorption results in a high back vowel, as in <em>cauculus</em> for <em>calculus</em> and Cretan Greek καυχός for χαλκός (<em>IC</em> 4.162.4 [late third century]).[^44] There is no such high vowel in these graffiti. Whoever incised this Greek heard only a vowel (and an [l] or [ɫ]) in the Italian names. The omission of <λ> after <ο> would be more likely to be the result of interference from Latin, in which this phenomenon is attested, than of a development either within Greek in general (Cretan not withstanding) or within Greek subject to Egyptian interference. However, such absorption of ‘dark l’, which is attested in Latin of the Roman period, is implausible in the Ptolemaic period and, therefore, it is less likely, but not inconceivable, that M(arcos) Volturios (588) was the Marcos Voturios of 283, 2003, and 2004. If 588 concerns a different man, we would have another Italian at the Syringes, 

<a id="page_246"></a>

who did not supply an ethnic (certainly not a Greek form), and we would have a (possibly) purely Latin graffito from some point in the Ptolemaic period (perhaps earlier than the Acutius inscription) in addition to the Greek graffiti in Greek script (283 and 2004) and to Latin graffiti showing Greek interference (2003) of one Marcos Voturios or several.

Even if Volturios in 588 does not belong in this dossier, we still have three instances of the Greek ethnic Ῥωμαῖος and two Greek representations of <em>Voturios</em> (283 and 2003) in addition to one instance of the name in Latin script (2004). The difference between medial <u> represented by <ου> (2003) or by <υ> (283) reflects diversity of practice and the lack of an established Greek spelling for this name: the former coincides with the (later) standard transcription of <u> as <ου>, while the latter is a transliteration and is only usual for <em>centuria</em> and occasional for <em>turma</em>.[^45] The initial syllables, at least as restored, show the converse treatment [Μ. Ου]ο-τυρ- (283), but Ὀ-τουρ- (2003). The essential problem is how to represent the Latin phoneme /w/, for which Koiné Greek had no grapheme: one solution was omission (2003), another, which is widely attested, was to use <ου> (as restored in 283).[^46] However, since Baillet’s drawing suggests that the damage to the graffito would suit a single letter better than the three he restored, it is probable that Ὀτύριος is what was incised as 283 (comparable with 2003) and that it was preceded by Μ. alone. However, the Roman abbreviation is found in the Latin graffiti (588 and 2004), while the Greek graffito (2003) has the <em>praenomen</em> in full. On that basis, [Ου]οτύριος should be read (without Μ., probably, given the spacing and use of the unabbreviated name in the Greek graffito). 

<a id="page_247"></a>

These differences of practice certainly reflect a lack of clarity about representing <em>Voturios</em>. Different (local) Greek incisers may have followed their own ideas, or Voturios, or a companion, may have experimented with different possibilities. However, it is likely that Volturios, or an Italian companion of his, incised the Latin of 588, since it is doubtful that an inciser of Latin could be found locally at Thebes at any time in the Ptolemaic period.[^47] The inciser of 588 knew the Latin spelling with <V> (as did that of 2004) and with <l>, unique among these four graffiti if we continue to associate them all with one individual Volturios and to disregard Voturius as a distinct personal name rather than a misspelling. However, the Greek graffiti (283 and 2004) could be the work of a local, and the <ω> in <em>Rωmaios</em> (2004), itself not the Latin ethnic form (<em>Rōmānus</em>), suggests that 2004 was incised by someone who was more at home with Greek than Latin and who heard, rather than read, either Latinised <em>Rōmaios</em> or Greek Ῥωμαῖος.

The presence of the ethnic Ῥωμαῖος (Greek, both in form and in script) is likely to reflect the non-Italian point of view of someone other than the bearer(s) of the name <em>Marcos Volturios</em>. The ethnic is found in the two graffiti in Greek script (283 and 2004) and in 2003, which, in Rωmaios, shows Greek interference in its script and, perhaps, its inflectional morphology. Indeed, as far as we can be sure, Greek interference in that graffito is concentrated entirely on the ethnic Rωmaios,[^48] itself not the Latin ethnic. A Marcus Voturius might be expected to identify himself with <em>Rōmānus</em> (or -<em>os</em>), but to be labelled as Ῥωμαῖος by another (and a Greek speaker, at that). By contrast, 588 is entirely in Latin script and does not feature any ethnic and, on these two points, parallels the Acutius inscription (<em>I.Syène</em> 321). Perhaps, the use of Latin script itself was sufficient in that inscription and in this graffito to signal (visually) that an individual was neither Egyptian nor Greek (in the wide sense of Greek speakers from throughout the Hellenistic world). As we saw above, the ethnic Ῥωμαῖος was found at Abydos and the Syringes 

<a id="page_248"></a>

with Greek names that were so widespread or so geographically unremarkable that the addition of an ethnic might be required.

A Greek inscription from the end of the Ptolemaic period <em>I.Philae</em> 1.63 (~ <em>OGI</em> 1.196), which attests a group of visitors at Philae, contains a cluster of Italian names and other indications of Italian origin for the first named member whose <em>proskynema</em> it records. His <em>tria</em> <em>nomina</em> are given and the inscription contains the earliest attestation of a Latin loanword in a text from Egypt: κεντορίωσι (line 9). Although, as we shall see, its details argue against the leader of the party being a visitor from Italy or indeed from outside Egypt, the inscription does provide evidence of increased contact with Romans.[^49]

| Γάϊος Ἰούλιος ΠΑΠΕΙΣ ἔπαρχος |  |
| --- | --- |
| ἥκω καὶ προσκεκύνηκα τὴν κυρί- |  |
| αν Ἶσιν, σὺν Ἰουλίωι τῶι υἱῶι, καὶ ὑ- |  |
| πὲρ Γαίωνος τοῦ νεωτέρου υἱοῦ, ἔ- |  |
| τι δὲ καὶ σὺν τοῖς φίλοις καὶ συν- | 5 |
| αποδήμοις Συμμάχωι, Εὐμένει, |  |
| Ἀπολλωνίωι Χάρητος καὶ υἱῶι Ἀπελλᾶι, |  |
| καὶ Ἀ̣π̣ί̣ω̣ν̣ι̣ [— – —] καὶ [— – —] καὶ [τοῖς] |  |
| κεντορίωσι Ῥούφωι, Δημητρίωι, Νίγρωι, |  |
| Ουαλερίωι, Λαβύωνι, Τερεντίωι, | 10 |
| Νικάνορι, Βαρωνᾶτι, καὶ τῶν παι- |  |
| δαρίων μου πάντων |  |
| (ἔτους) κʹ το<ῦ> καὶ εʹ, Φαμ(ενὼθ) λʹ. |  |

> I, Gaius Julius PAPEIS, <em>eparchos</em>, came and reverenced Lady Isis, together with Julius my son, on behalf of Gaion my younger son – also with my friends and fellow-travellers (Symmachos, Eumenes, Apollonios, son of Chares, and his son Apelles, and Apion … and …) and the centurions (Rufus, Demetrios, Niger, Valerius, <em>Labyon</em>, Terentius, Nicanor, <em>Baronas</em>) – and of all my children. In year 20 (that is also year 5), 30th of Phamenoth.

The double regnal year in this inscription gives the date as 28 March 32, the twentieth year of Cleopatra VII as queen of Egypt, her fifth as ruler of Chalcis in Syria.[^50] (The title ἔπαρχος 

<a id="page_249"></a>

has been left untranslated, the name ΠΑΠΕΙΣ unaccented and left in transliteration, and the names Λαβύων and Βαρωνᾶς left in italicised transliteration and without Anglicised equivalents in order to draw attention to them as problems in the interpretation of this inscription). This inscription differs from the Acutius inscription (<em>I.Syène</em> 321) in its first-person verbs (not third-person), its statement of the purpose of the visit (προσκεκύνηκα: line 2), its reference to Isis (line 3), and its date by the Egyptian calendar (line 13), not those of Rome or of the Macedonian Ptolemaic dynasty.

The use of the <em>tria nomina</em> here in fact points to an Egyptian rather than a Roman visiting from Italy. Although the <em>cognomen</em> is now read as ΠΑΠΕΙΣ (not Πάπειος, as in Dittenberger (1903–5: 281 and 579)), this Gaius Julius continues to be thought to have the <em>cognomen Papius</em>,[^51] even though his identification with a son of Gaius Papius, the author of the <em>lex Papia de peregrinis</em>, must be rejected on prosopographical grounds (with Dittenberger (1903–5: 281)): a Gaius with the <em>nomen gentile</em> Julius could not also have <em>Papius</em> as a <em>nomen gentile</em>. The spelling Πάπεις for Πάπιος could be an instance of <ει> for <ι> before a vowel and of syncope of <ο> in -ιος, but there are no parallels within this inscription to corroborate such an analysis.[^52] Instead, it is simpler to take ΠΑΠΕΙΣ at face value as the well-attested Egyptian name Παπ(ε)εις, variously spelled and accented (see TM Nam 4863), a suggestion already made by Dack (1983: 208–9). Papeis’ <em>praenomen</em> and <em>nomen</em> then become those of an Egyptian who was granted citizenship (and perhaps freedom) by Julius Caesar and perhaps after military service with Caesar. His single Egyptian name then became his <em>cognomen</em>. (Other <em>Gaii Iulii</em> in the final Ptolemaic decades have been reported by Dack (1980: 45–6), who labelled them ‘freedmen’ (‘vrijgelatene’). Almost all have a Greek personal name, not a Latin <em>cognomen</em> as their third name.)

This analysis has some corroboration from the names of the sons of this <em>eparchos</em>. Papeis gave his new <em>nomen gentile</em> to his older son, in accordance with Roman practice, and named his 

<a id="page_250"></a>

younger son, Γαίων, with a hypocoristic built on his new <em>praenomen</em> and the suffix -ōn-. Such a formation is more likely to be the creation of a Greek speaker than a Latin speaker. The Greek suffix was readily used to form nicknames (Buck 1933: 32), but the Latin suffix was limited to forming <em>cognomina</em> and derivatives from them (hence, Καισαρίων and <em>Rufiō</em>). Dittenberger (1903–5: 281) could cite only Μαρκίων as a hypocoristic built on a <em>praenomen</em>. The principal member of this group of visitors to Philae is far more likely, then, to have been an enfranchised Greek-speaking Egyptian than a Roman citizen visiting from Italy.

The names of Papeis’ companions suggest a group of diverse origins. As Dittenberger (1903–5: 282) noted, the συναπόδημοι (‘fellow travellers’) all have Greek names, while the centurions mostly have Latin <em>cognomina</em> as their sole recorded name. In addition to two of the exceptions who have Greek names (Demetrios and Nicanor: lines 9 and 11), the name Βαρωνᾶς (line 11), unattested elsewhere, is, at the very least, not Latin in its morphology (dative Βαρωνᾶτι, not Βαρῶνι). This name may be a Hellenisation of the Aramaic name, <em>Barōnā</em>,[^53] which would add to the onomastic diversity evident in this inscription. The morphology here is consistent with Hellenisation of a foreign name, particularly a Semitic or Egyptian one.[^54] Dack (1983: 205) suggested a Hellenisation of a Latin name with <Β> for <V>: <em>Varus</em> or <em>Varro</em>, which is possible, but unlikely at this date.[^55] For that reason, if Βαρωνᾶς is Latin, it is more likely to be based on <em>bārō</em> ‘dullard’, used as a <em>cognomen</em>,[^56] with Greek morphology.

The orthography of this inscription further suggests that whoever was responsible for its Greek was not well acquainted with written Latin. First, the name of one of the centurions, Λαβύων (line 10), has been taken as the Latin <em>cognomen</em> <em>Labeō</em> (Bernand 1969: 339), for which Λαβέων would be expected. The <υ> for <ε> in an accented syllable is consistent with the restriction of such interchanges noted by Gignac (1976: 273–4) to contexts with 

<a id="page_251"></a>

a back vowel (as here), a nasal, or /s/ following. However, the vowel here only carries the accent in accordance with the conventions for editing Greek texts. Since the Latin original, <em>Labeōni</em>, would be accented on the penultimate syllable, this interchange is found in an unaccented syllable. Therefore, the strong stress accent of Coptic could account this interchange as a representation of a reduced vowel (see Gignac 1976: 275). Then, the loanword κεντορίωσι (line 9), a clear indication of contact with Latin speakers and with the Roman military, shows <ο>. (Transliteration with <υ> was ‘usual’ for this word, while a transcription with <ου> is by far the exception.[^57] Although this spelling with <ο> is found (Gignac 1976: 222), it is very rare and, as Gignac did not note, it is not found later than the time of Augustus.[^58] This was not the spelling that became the norm once a Roman military presence was established. Instead, it seems to have been a short-lived, or <em>ad hoc</em>, rendering of <em>centurio</em>[^59] and reflects Greek representation of Latin <u> (both [ŭ] and [ū]) as <ο>, especially in the context of a resonant.) In renderings of <em>Saturninus</em> and related names, Greek <ο> for Latin <u> ‘predominates’ (Gignac 1976: 221) and <ο> was ‘generally earlier’ than <ου> in representations of <em>Sulpicius</em> and <em>Secundus</em> and their feminine counterparts (Gignac 1976: 219–20). <em>Syringes</em> 1830, cited as a bilingual by Adams (2003a: 585), is instructive: Σα[τ]ο[ρ]νῖνος ἱστόρησα <em>Saturninus uidi</em>. Whoever wrote those two sentences used Greek <ο> for Latin <u> in this name.

The double date is a further indication that this inscription has a Hellenistic Egyptian perspective, not that of Roman visitors from Italy at Philae for ‘religious’ purposes or tourism. We cannot 

<a id="page_252"></a>

know which member of this group was responsible for the choice to use not only a purely Egyptian date but also the additional regnal year that acknowledged Cleopatra’s rule of Chalcis (a gift from Mark Antony). It certainly stands in contrast with the Roman date and consular year left on the Acutius inscription (<em>I.Syène</em> 321). If priests alone could incise a record of a <em>proskynema</em>,[^60] the choice of calendar and regnal years may have been no more than their statement of allegiance to Cleopatra. However, even if a priest incised the date, the choice and statement of allegiance may still have been those of Papeis (with or without the consent of his companions).

The presence of an exact date enables us to look for other visitors who left a record at Philae on that date. On the basis of the re-dating of <em>I.Philae</em> 2.146 also to 28.3.32 by Bingen (2008: 249–51), we have a record of a <em>proskynema</em> by one Nicomachos and all his companions (τῶν παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ πάντων: lines 5–6). This Nicomachos was an honorary ‘cousin’ (<em>syggenes</em>) of a Ptolemy and a <em>strategos</em> (lines 2–3). The two <em>proskynemata</em> may be entirely coincidental. They were surely not the only ones that day. We may see a Ptolemaic military presence near Philae on that day that consisted of individuals with Egyptian, Greek, and Italian names (and perhaps others).

The Demotic evidence for Italians at sacred sites is doubtful. <em>P.Saqqara</em> 60, published by El-Khouly (1973: 153), which preserves first-century rosters of the names of priests at the Sarapeum at Memphis, may read <em>Swrȝ</em> (recto, x+I 3), a Demotic transcription of the name <em>Severus</em> (Migahid 1998: 128). If the reading and the analysis are correct, the bearer of a Latin name served as a priest in the Sarapeum at Memphis. A graffito, which may be much earlier, from the temple of Imenhōtep at Philae has <em>Swre</em> as the son of Peteharbēk (<em>Graff.Dodec.Philae</em> 497.1 (after 285 and as late as 499 CE)). If <em>Swre</em> is a means of writing Latin <em>Severus</em>, and not Demotic <em>Sour</em>, this ostracon could be the earliest attestation of a Roman name in Ptolemaic Egypt. That is early enough, earlier than all our other evidence (especially our literary evidence for 

<a id="page_253"></a>

Romans in the Eastern Mediterranean), to raise doubts about seeing <em>Severus</em> here, and a later point in the date range 285 BCE to 499 CE is more likely. Later instances of <em>Swre</em> or <em>Swrʿ</em> in two graffiti of obeisance to Isis at Philae (dated, at the earliest, to 30) may involve the Roman name, if not Romans themselves: the father of Petepwēr junior (<em>Graff.Dodec.Philae</em> 105.3) and the father of Petepwēr senior (<em>Graff.Dodec.Philae</em> 121.2), perhaps the same man whose name was spelled differently.

## Italians in Egypt in Military Contexts

Individuals who may be identified as Italians to varying degrees of certainty are found in military contexts throughout the Ptolemaic period, both in Egypt and in the wider Ptolemaic sphere of influence. We have already met the Italian-named centurions with Papeis at Philae.

A papyrus associated with the Zenon Archive shows that, as early as the middle of the third century, one Ῥωμαῖος served in the Egyptian army and was based at Alexandria, but little else about the individual is certain, even the nature of his name. <em>P.Lond</em>. 7.1986 (01.9.252) names Δ̣ίννος Ῥωμ̣αῖος τῶν Αὐτομέδοντος (‘Dinnos, a Roman, of the troop of Automedon’) as the first of the witnesses to a loan contract. The seven street names that relate to Arsinoe and her cult titles and the use of the Macedonian date without an Egyptian counterpart point to an Alexandrian origin, but the contract was recovered at Philadelphia, where, we presume, it travelled with one of the parties concerned. Although there is no positive internal evidence for associating this document with the Zenon Archive, that archive is the most common source, other than mummy cartonnage, for papyri of such an early date.[^61] This Dinnos associated with others in a military milieu, at least for the purpose of this loan contract: Āgesandros and Echedāmos, the borrower, probably were syntagmatarchs of particular streets (so, Bell 1924: 24) and the witnesses Callimachos, Dionysios, and Polemarchos were <em>tachomisthoi</em> of particular streets. Dionysios, son of Chion, a ‘Persian’,[^62] was a member of the palace guard (τῶν περὶ 

<a id="page_254"></a>

αὐλήν), another indication of an Alexandrian origin. The reading Δ̣ίννος is relatively certain,[^63] but as the Italic <em>praenomen</em> that would be expected as a single name in a Greek document of this period, it does not take us very far. The existence of a <em>praenomen</em> <em>Dinnus</em> is corroborated by <em>Dinnius</em>, the <em>nomen</em> derived from it that is attested at Puteoli (<em>CIL</em> X 2081) and at Misenum (<em>CIL</em> X 3572 and 3573). Since, even with subsequent discoveries of inscriptions, that <em>nomen</em> remains principally attested in documents from the Imperial Period, we have little with which to work on a Ptolemaic instance of <em>Dinnos</em>.[^64]

Military contexts, often in the wider Ptolemaic sphere of influence, are clear for several isolated individuals. One Λεύκιος Ῥωμαῖος, son of Gaius, a commandant at Itanos on Crete, left a dedicatory inscription to Ptolemy Philopator in Greek: <em>IC</em> 3, 4.18.4 (244–209). A Νόυιος Νουίου (<em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 4 ii 40/112 [125–100] ~ <em>SB</em> 1.599; cf. ii 20/92) bore the title πεντηκόνταρχος. One Gaius Lutatius Crispus is known from <em>IC</em> 4.215 C 1–3 (perhaps mid-first century: Gortyn): Γ(άϊος) Λυτ{ο̣}άτιος Κρίσπος στρα|τιώτης Πτο-(λεμαιικὸς) Γορτυνίων πρόξε|νος καὶ πολίτας αὐτὸς καὶ ἔγγονοι. He was a soldier (apparently in the army of a Ptolemy),[^65] a <em>proxenos</em> of the people of Gortyn, and a citizen, a status shared with his descendants (ἔγγονοι). As such, he had long-term links with Crete, Egypt, and Italy. The members of a religious association named as dedicators on an inscription in honour of Ptolemy XIII Auletes and his sister-wife Cleopatra at Hermopolis Magna (<em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 5) may have named an Ἀ[ρρι]αν[ός] (line 16: <em>SB</em> 1.4206 even gave Ἀρρ̣ι̣αν-

<a id="page_255"></a>

[ός]) and certainly included an Ὡρίων (a Greek name with Egyptian origins), whose father had the name Άυείδιος (<em>Avidius</em>: I 69/18), and a Δαλλίων, whose father may have had the name <em>Arrianus</em> (I 18/6 (12.9.80 or 11.9.79)). The context of the second of these fathers is damaged on the stone. All that remains, as articulated by Milne (1905: 25), is Δα̣λλίων̣ Ἀ̣[․․]ά̣νου and Bernand (1999: 37) printed Δαλλίων Ἀ̣ε̣ιάνου instead. The name Δαλλίων is not known to the <em>LGPN</em>, but Δηλίων and Δᾱλίων are, among other names (or nicknames in -ων), associated with Delos. That the dedicators were military personnel is indicated by παρεφ[εδρ]ε[ύον]τες ‘serving as guards’ (line 2). As with <em>I.Hermoupolis</em> 6 discussed above, the wider onomastic interest of this inscription lies in the number of Semitic names it presents.[^66]

## Italians in the Ptolemaic Administration

There is far less evidence for Italians in civilian roles than in military contexts. The Oscan family of the Trebii are represented by a notary (μονογράφος) at Crocodilopolis (in the Fayum) in <em>P.Petr</em>. 2.32 2a.13–14 (216/215). The mobility of this family even at this early date is evident from the presence of members of the same <em>gens</em> at Delos (see Fraser 1972: 170).

## Italians Engaged in Commercial Activity

Italians were involved in commercial activity in Egypt as early as the Zenon Archive. Names, but not ethnics, are attested in several documents. A Marius is listed as a source of timber in <em>SB</em> 26.16504 (a receipt found at Philadelphia, but perhaps written elsewhere, and attested by two partial copies: <em>PSI</em> 5.545.8 and <em>P.Cair.Zen</em>.1.59112.1). Since this receipt carries the date 26.11.257 BCE, this Marius is the earliest precisely dated and securely read instance of an Italian in Egypt. The name <em>Statius</em> is attested in two or three Zenon papyri[^67] and 

<a id="page_256"></a>

may refer to the same individual. A Varus is named in a fragment of a letter that appears to deal with accounts: <em>P.Lond</em>.7.2136 fr. 1.1 (263–229).

A cluster of Italian <em>praenomina</em> and <em>nomina</em> on an ostracon from Edfu probably shows the involvement of Italians, among others, in the wine trade by the end of the Ptolemaic period. <em>O.Edfou</em> 3.371 lists seventy names, mostly in threes. Some names are repeated (and variously abbreviated), sometimes with further specification (πρ(εσβύτερος) and νε(ώτερος), e.g. in I 19 and 20). The ostracon is dated by an Egyptian month and a regnal year without naming the ruler. On the basis of the Italian names, the ruler has been assumed to be Cleopatra VII and the ostracon dated to 08.10.49.

| column I | column II | column III | line |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| (ἔτος) δ Φαῶφι εοἰνοδιχίαι |  |  |  |
| ΛότκιςὈρεντᾶςΕυιέϊς——Ἀλέξανδρο(ς) | ἌττιςΣώκινδροςΦαλλάϊς——Δαμᾶς πρ-(εσβύτερος) | ἙρμίαςΔαμᾶς πρ(εσβύτερος)Δαμᾶς νε(ώτερος)——Τιμόθις | 1 |
| ἙρμάϊςΚάνωπος——ἌττιςΦαλλάϊςΤψόσι̣ς̣—— | Δαμᾶς ν̣ε̣(ώτερος)Ἑρμάϊς——ΤείρωνΝικάνω(ρ)Σέλευκος γι()—— | ΠισίδηςΣώκινδρ(ος) α——ἌβδηλοςΖανν(άϊς)Σώκιν(δρος) α—— | 5 |
| ΤιμότιοςΜέλαςΖωΐνιο(ς)——Ἀντώνιο(ς)Σώκινδρ(ο)ς | ΠεριτένιοςΚοΐνθοςΜέλας——ΣοκῶνιςὈρεντᾶς | ΠισίδηςΤιμόθιςΔαμᾶς νε(ώτερος) α——ΜᾶρκοςΠεριντέν(ιος) α | 10 |
| Ζαννάϊς——Ἀπολλ(ώνιος) με()Ἀπολλ(ώνιος) στ()Ἀπολλ(ώνιος) ν ̣υ()——Δαμᾶς πρ(εσβύτερος) | Λότκις——ΖαννάϊςἈντώνι(ος)Ουίβις——Γάϊς | ΔέκμοςΑὐρήλιςΚοΐνθος β——ΣαβοῦροςἈπολ(λώνιος) με() α—— | 15 |
| <a id="page_257"></a><br><br>Δαμᾶς [νε(ώτερος)] | ΝεμέριΜιοριάλ——ΜᾶρκοςἌβδηλος | ἙρμίαςΔαμᾶς πρ(εσβύτερος)Φαλάκιος——Νικόμαχο(ς)Σέλευκος | 20 |
|  |  | Πομπήϊς β——ΔιεντᾶςἈντών(ιος) α | 25 |

One of two clues as to the activity of Aurelius, Antonius, Decimus, Gaius, Marcus, Pompeius, Quintus, Tiro, and, probably, Vibius and, perhaps, Lucius,[^68] at Edfu is οἰνοδιχίαι in the heading. This word is unattested elsewhere and seems to have been understood to be a masculine plural of οἰνοδιχίας,[^69] an <em>addendum lexicis</em>. Other analyses are possible[^70] and the reading has been silently emended by some.[^71] It is at least clear that wine is involved, and the suggestion of a relationship with words concerning distribution (διχάζω, διχαίω, and δίχα)[^72] is reasonable. Whether these Italians were the buyers, sellers, or third-party recipients of some kind is not made clear by the ostracon nor is the purpose of these distributions.

<a id="page_258"></a>

The other clue is the find-spot. One of the main routes from the ports of the east coast of Egypt to the Nile valley ran through the wadis that emerged at Edfu, Graeco-Roman Apollonopolis Magna.[^73] Edfu was the site of the rock-temple of Amon Re and the Ptolemaic temple to Horus-Apollo completed in 57, less than a decade before the most likely date of this ostracon (we may wonder, then, whether the instances of the name Ἀπολλώνιος on this ostracon had particular local associations). The distributions of wine may have been either related to the temple or purely commercial (i.e., unrelated to the temple).

There is little that would confirm that this is an account[^74] and the assumption that the Italians were soldiers.[^75] Apart from a few instances of α and β, which might be numerals or designations for common names, only the name Ἀπολλ() (I 16–18 and III 19) is followed by abbreviations that could concern quantities. However, those abbreviations could be designations of different individuals with that name, as with Δαμᾶς the older and the younger (I 19–20).

The array of names on the ostracon shows that bearers of Italian names were not ethnically isolated. There are several Greek names (e.g. Ἀλέξανδρος I 4) and Greek adaptations of Egyptian names (e.g. Κάνωπος I 6, Egyptian <em>Gnps</em>). The name Πισίδης may be the ethnic Pisidian, which, as a personal name, suggests a slave, probably from Asia Minor.[^76] Other names are purely Egyptian, such as the feminine name Τψόσι̣ς̣ (I 9), perhaps prefixed by the (feminine) definite article. The uniquely attested Σοκῶνις seems to reflect an Egyptian theophoric name built on <em>Sobek</em>. If the name Ὀρεντᾶς is a rendering akin to Ὀροντᾶς,[^77] Ὀροντῆς, and Ὀρυντᾶς, or a modern misreading for one of those spellings, this name would be Iranian (see Huyse 1990: 53–4). Dialectal (non-Koiné) Greek Ὀρέντᾱς is also possible. The largest non-Italian share of the names has Semitic origins. Sylvie Honigman (2003: 74–5 note 28) identified Ἄβδηλος, Ευιέϊς, and Ζαννάϊς, not only as Semitic (as 

<a id="page_259"></a>

Tcherikover, Fuks & Stern 1964: 255), but, specifically, as Nabatean. She added Φαλλάϊς and even Ουίβις as a Greek form of a hypocoristic name built on the Arabic root <em>whb</em>, which appeared in names of the ‘given by a god or the gods’ type. The name Μιοριάλ, which is unattested elsewhere, also may be Semitic, even though it was not identified as Semitic by Wuthnow (1930: 77), Ruozzi Sala (1974: 28), or Ilan and Ziem (2008: 728). Although its final -αλ suggests a Semitic name (hence, its word-final accent), the amount of abbreviation shown in this text calls for caution. The origins of Σαβοῦρος[^78] and Νέμερι[^79] are disputed, and the origin of Σώκινδρος (I 14, II 2, III 6, and III 9) remains unknown.

We do not know whose record of distributions this ostracon was nor do we know its purpose. Its Egyptian month suggests a non-Roman context. Also, confusion about voiceless stops and aspirates (Κοΐνθος II 11 and III 17 (followed by β) and Τιμότιος I 10) is conspicuous and could be the result of Egyptian interference on the Greek of this writer.[^80] However, the frequent syncope in -ι(ο)ς[^81] is not decisive in situating this ostracon.

All that can be said is that by the end of the Ptolemaic period Italians were involved in distributions of wine of some kind in conjunction with Egyptians (both men and, as Τψόσις shows, a woman), with other locals (perhaps, originally, of Greek ethnicity), and with visitors or residents, particularly some whose names are likely to be Nabataean.

Second-century loan contracts, accounts, and receipts involve people from throughout the Mediterranean in commerce with bearers of Italian names. A Ῥοῦφος was named in relation to 

<a id="page_260"></a>

a κεράμιον (<em>BGU</em> 6.1490.4 [second or first century: Edfu]). The wording τὰς <ἀρτάβας> ἐν Προπέλλωι (<em>P.Tebt</em>.1.99 ii 48) has been understood to refer to <em>artabae</em> ‘owned by’ Propellus.[^82] <em>SB</em> 6.9552 iv 4 (26.9.136 or 25.9.135: Coptos), a tax receipt, includes a greeting for one Comes, apparently one of a group of makers of garments. The name Κίντος appears with the ethnic Μεσσαλιώτης,[^83] a Γνάϊος is mentioned (<em>SB</em> 3.7169.12), and the ethnics [Λακε]δαιμόνιος, [Θ]εσσαλονικεύς, Ἐλεάτης, and Καρ[χη]-δόνιος also appear (<em>SB</em> 3.7169, 17, 18, and 20). Ulrich Wilcken (1925: 97) may have been correct to distinguish Κίντος from Κόϊντος,[^84] the usual transcription of <em>Quintus</em>, and to identify here <em>Cintos</em>, a Celtic name. Clearer evidence of Celtic names is found in a letter from one Lysimachos to one Sosios (<em>P.Michael</em>. 7r3–4 [08.4.136 or 11.4.147]), in which an Adminius is named as the recipient of forty drachmas of bronze. La’da (2002: 11) suggests that his ethnic τὸν Α̣ἴδαιον may be that of the Gallic Aedui, since his name, printed as Ἀ̣δμί̣νιον with due caution, is that of the prince of the Cantiaci who was banished by his father Cunobelinus and surrendered to Caligula.[^85]

Relations between Egyptian officials and Italian <em>negotiatores</em> at Delos are evident in the second century. The brothers Pedii, Gaius. and Lucius,[^86] Ῥωμαῖοι, whose filiation was expressed in the Roman manner (line 5: Γαίου υἱοί), left a statue to honour [Πολέ]-μαρ<χ>ον in a dedication to Apollo and Artemis (<em>OGI</em> 1.133 ~ <em>ID</em> 1527 (c. 127)). The honorand was described as an <em>epistrategos</em> and 

<a id="page_261"></a>

an honorary ‘cousin’ (τὸν συνγενῆ: 1) of Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II (146–116 BCE). The occasion was his ἀρέτη, καλοκἀγαθία, and εὔνοια (lines 6–8) towards the Pedii. (All this was more striking when the name of the honourand was read as Μᾶρκον.[^87]) Dittenberger (1903–5: 215 and 216) asserted that Ῥωμαῖοι not of noble families and named without <em>cognomina</em> and without official or honorific titles should be considered to be <em>negotiatores</em>. Corroboration is found in <em>OGI</em> 1.135.1–3 (~ <em>ID</em> 1526; 127): Ῥωμαίων οἱ εὐεργετηθέντες ναύκληροι | καὶ ἔμποροι ἐν τῆι γενομένῃ καταλή|ψει Ἀλεξανδρείας.

The existence of a community of <em>Italici</em> at Alexandria is attested by a Latin–Greek bilingual inscription that they left during their time at Delos (<em>ID</em> 1699.1 [99 BCE]: <em>Alexandreae Italicei quei fuere</em>). As Adams observed,[^88] this inscription shares several features with other Latin inscriptions that refer to <em>Italici</em>, both at Delos and elsewhere: bi-version bilinguals with <ei> spellings, the Greek accusative of the honorand, and a relative clause with a locative. In the context of these conventional features, the absence of <em>negotiantur</em>, the verb that was another such conventional feature, is striking and distinguishes these Alexandrian <em>Italici</em> from those on Sicily and in the province of Achaea. Instead of an explicit indication that trade was their reason to be at Delos, the inscription has the third-person plural <em>fuere</em> and thus shows the continued use of old and more prestigious morphology.[^89] Since the epigraphy of the <em>Italici</em> is so peculiar to the <em>Italici</em>, it is likely that these Alexandrian <em>Italici</em> themselves selected this form and, thus, we may glimpse a little of their variety of Latin. The perfect tense indicates that they had previously been at Alexandria, but leaves the character of that time unclear. Was their association with Alexandria now entirely past? If they were based there for a time, had they been based elsewhere in the Mediterranean earlier still?[^90] The Greek 

<a id="page_262"></a>

counterpart implies that <em>Alexandreae</em> is locative and belongs with <em>fuere</em> in the relative clause <em>Italici</em> based at Alexandria: οἱ ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείαι (line 5: sc. Ἰταλικοί; cf. line 1 and Ἰταλικ]οί line 6).[^91] However, the rest of the Greek text is so damaged that we are left wondering whether their presence at Delos was intended to be a brief, a longer-term, or an indefinite absence from Alexandria and whether we should see migration or mobility here.

The first-century data may suggest the involvement of Italians in transactions that were recorded in Demotic, not Greek, and thus attest interaction, however indirect, between Italians and non-Hellenised Egyptians. Ostraca from Oxyrhynchus were dated by their editors between the first century BCE and the first century CE (and to 146–132 on Trismegistos). Although the editors preferred not to speculate, <em>Lpws</em> (30 convex x+10) may be the Italic name <em>Lupus</em>. A Clemens appears, as <em>Klims</em>, as a party in a transaction of spelt (35 concave I x+5). A Sabinus (as <em>Spnws</em>) is named as the father of a Peteamounis (14 concave 6).[^92] The same combination of names is found on another ostracon (11 concave 4).[^93] <em>P.Qasr Ibrim Dem</em>. 19, an ostracon found at Qasr Ibrim (the find-spot of the famous Gallus Papyrus), contains <em>wrs</em> followed by a ‘foreigner-determinative’ (Ray 2005: 44) and no further text. This is probably a transcription of <em>Verus</em> or <em>Varus</em>.[^94] The purpose of the ostracon is unknown. Ray (2005: 44) commented that, if the 

<a id="page_263"></a>

text does refer to a Varus or Verus, then ‘a date at the very end of the Hellenistic period or the century following’ would be likely.

In the final years of Cleopatra VII, we find a highly mobile and exceptional individual who takes us from isolated names and occasional clusters in documentary texts to history as known from literary sources. <em>P.Bingen</em> 45 (23.2.33), a royal ordinance, granted tax exemptions on imports of Coan wine in Coan amphoras, exports, and landholdings in Egypt to Publius Canidius (once re-edited by Minnen [2000: 32–3]), a Roman citizen and Mark Antony’s most important commander. Cleopatra may have granted these privileges to him, in her own handwriting (Minnen 2000: 30–1), only in exchange for his allegiance to her. However, since the exemptions applied to Canidius’ heirs, we see one Roman who had long-term interests and static assets in Egypt as well as relations with Cos. We may assume that he had Latin-speaking associates to manage those assets on his behalf, even if his tenant farmers (line 9) were all indigenous, non-Hellenized Egyptians.

## Latin as a Symbolic Language of Authority

One Latin text remains to be considered before concluding this study: <em>OGI</em> 1.129.11–12. Four Latin words follow, and summarise, rather than translate, the import of the preceding Greek text, itself containing a quotation of an earlier Greek document.

| βασιλίσσης καὶ βασι-λέως προσταξάντων,ἀντὶ τῆς προανακει-μένης περὶ τῆς ἀναθέσε-ως τῆς προσευχῆς πλα-κός, ἡ ὑπογεγραμμένηἐπιγραφήτω.βασιλεὺς Πτολεμαῖος Εὐ-εργέτης τὴν προσευχὴνἄσυλον. | Since the queen and the king gave the order, instead of the tablet that was set up previously about the dedication of the synagogue, let the following text be inscribed:King Ptolemy Euergetes(declared) the synagogueinviolate. |
| --- | --- |
| <em>regina et</em><em>rex iusser</em>(<em>un</em>)<em>t</em>. | The queen andthe king gave the order. |

The queen and king – in that order – who gave the ruling that Ptolemy Euergetes’ (probably II: 146–116) grant of <em>asyleia</em> to this 

<a id="page_264"></a>

synagogue (line 5: προσευχή), probably at Leontopolis in Lower Egypt, should remain in force, are most likely to be Cleopatra VII and either her son Caesarion or, perhaps, one of her brothers. Rigsby (2003) dated the inscription, on the basis of its letter forms, to the end of the Ptolemaic period and has argued that the Greek frame and the Latin are contemporary, since the Greek is increasingly compressed to leave space for the large Latin letters. We cannot tell whether the same stonemason carved both the Greek and the Latin and whether the Latin originated with the Royal Chancellery or with the synagogue itself.

Here, we have a bi-version bilingual text, but one that is ‘partial’ or ‘unequal’ in Adams’ terms (2003a: 33 and 35). As Rigsby (2003: 132) commented, ‘the Latin is not informative: it would not tell a truly Greekless reader what to do’. In Adams’ terms (2003a: 34–5), the Latin is ‘symbolic’. The Latin functions, in Rigsby’s words (2003: 132), as ‘a warning that even Romans must pay heed to the Greek text’. The implicature of the Latin royal titles and abbreviation of <em>iusser</em>(<em>un</em>)<em>t</em> is ‘Latin readers, hands off!’.[^95] Since the synagogue’s history of <em>asyleia</em> from the time of Ptolemy (VIII) Euergetes (II) was not communicated to readers of the Latin text, we may reasonably suspect that there was no Latin speaking (or reading) community associated with the synagogue, either of Jews or of proselytes, to whom the peculiar historical, religious, and legal status of the synagogue would be of interest. The presence of any Latin was a warning to those Latin-reading outsiders who might violate the synagogue’s <em>asyleia</em>, most likely Roman soldiers. For those who could read the Greek, but not the Latin, the Latin script indicated that the grant of <em>asyleia</em> had the weight of Rome behind it. The Greek reports that this inscription replaced another πλάξ (lines 3–6: ἀντὶ τῆς προανακει|-μένης περὶ τῆς ἀναθέσε|ως τῆς προσευχῆς πλα|κός), the only contemporary addition to the content of the Latin text. We may wonder whether that earlier statement of the grant of <em>asyleia</em> entirely in Greek 

<a id="page_265"></a>

had been damaged by Latin speakers or had simply fallen into disrepair such that it needed to be replaced, given the presence of foreign, Latin-reading, military personnel.

## Conclusion

Long before Ptolemaic Egypt became Roman <em>Aegyptus</em>, numerous bearers of Italian names and ethnics participated in the often overlapping sacred, military, and commercial spheres of activity. Indeed, Italian names of those engaged in military and commercial activities are attested as early as the Zenon Archive with certainty, while others at Philae and the Syringes may also be as early as the third century. These attestations present a striking contrast with our literary sources for Roman activity in the Eastern Mediterranean. However, the move to showing that bearers of Italian names (or of names that may be Italic) were in fact Italians and, indeed, speakers of Latin or an Italic language has been beset with various difficulties. Of the many names reported by Trismegistos that are neither Greek nor Egyptian, many have been discounted on the grounds of several kinds of ambiguity, many more than it has been possible to discuss. Several individuals traditionally identified as Italians have been shown to be unlikely to be so. Italian names have been found with non-Italian ethnics, thus showing some degree of mobility and migration, while bearers of the ethnic Ῥωμαῖος with common Greek names, such as those attested at Abydos, were probably Greeks from Italy in Egypt, not Romans.

A significant discovery has been the association of these bearers of Italian names not only with bearers of Egyptian names, but also with bearers of Semitic and Iranian (and, perhaps, Celtic) names as well as bearers of Greek names that could have been used by people of all those ethnicities. The Ptolemaic sphere of influence was polyethnic, and its Italians, whether attested as individuals or in clusters, seem to have been integrated, rather than isolated, and involved with populations whose names, at least, had diverse origins. They were not only involved in superficial contact with Greeks for commercial purposes, as they were throughout the Mediterranean. The possibility of attestations of Italian names in 

<a id="page_266"></a>

Demotic texts reflects a particularly fascinating degree of contact. Italian names that appear in lists of members of religious associations in military contexts alongside Semitic and Iranian names demonstrate integration of populations with diverse onomastic origins or, at least, the diffusion of names from various sources.

Our search for Italians in Ptolemaic Egypt has traced mobility further afield. Commercial activity was in conjunction, not just in contact, with Old Greece (a Lacedaemonian, a Thessalonian, and Coans), but also with the wider Hellenistic world (a Messaliot, a Carthaginian, and Nabateans at Edfou). Italians at Delos with links to Alexandria even had connections with honorary ‘cousins’ of the Ptolemies, and Italians served the Ptolemies as commanders on Crete.

It is hard to assess the extent to which these bearers of Italian names reflect mobility in the Mediterranean, and within Egypt, or longer-term migration to Egypt. Those who visited Abydos, Philae, or the Syringes at Thebes and left their marks were certainly Italians resident elsewhere in Egypt for commercial or military or diplomatic purposes (the senator Lucius Memmius would be a notable exception, but his ‘sightseeing’ followed a stay at Alexandria). Although Publius Canidius had long-term interests in Egypt and elsewhere, he himself was not confined to Egypt. Commercial links might have been brief or long-term. Still, the extent of integration that we have seen, particularly in the military sphere, suggests some degree of permanent residence after migration.

The little Latin known from Ptolemaic Egypt comes mainly from bilingual texts or contexts, entirely so if one Marcos Volturios was responsible for all four of the graffiti at the Syringes that were discussed above. The Latin of the Acutius inscription not only exceeds the content of the Greek part, it does so with a particularly Roman emphasis. The short Greek graffito Γάϊος Ἀκούτιος would not have stood out among the many names incised on the walls at Philae, but the full and precise consular date with a Roman numeral are conspicuous, even for those who could not read the Latin, and thus make a statement that enforces the claim <em>hoc primus uenit</em>. At the Syringes, M. Volturios, in Latin script and abbreviated, was clearly Latin (neither Greek, 

<a id="page_267"></a>

nor Egyptian), while Marcos Voturios, especially when incised in Greek, needed to be distinguished as Ῥωμαῖος. Although the amount of Latin may be minimal in relation to the Greek, as in the addition to the royal grant of <em>asyleia</em> to a synagogue, or maximal, as in the case of the graffiti of Acutius and his companions, or more balanced, as with the graffiti at the Syringes, the use of Latin seems to have had particular impact as a marker of non-Greek and non-Egyptian identity and, for the last of the Ptolemies, of authority.

## Notes
