---
title: "Handbook of Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics, Volume 1"
author: "Jared Klein, Brian Joseph, Matthias Fritz (eds.); in cooperation with Mark Wenthe"
date: "2017"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: 2026-05-07
source_file: "978-3-11-039324-8.epub.zip"
chunk: "39. The documentation of Greek"
pages: "unknown"
---

# 39. The documentation of Greek

- 1. Introduction
- 2. A refining of the terms synchronic, diachronic, and historical
- 3. Distinguishing text and performance
- 4. Alphabetic literacy
- 5. References

## 1. Introduction

Documentation for the Greek language extends from the present all the way back to the middle of the second millennium BCE. In other words, Greek has been documented for roughly 3,500 years of human existence. Since Greek has survived as a living language, in a variety of dialects, all the way into the present, the current repertoire of linguistic evidence includes the sum total of the speech of all native speakers of Modern Greek whose speaking can be heard and seen directly. Alternatively, Modern Greek speech can be heard and seen indirectly by way of the technologies of audio and video recording. Also, Modern Greek speech is available for recording by way of online, printed, typewritten, or handwritten texts. As linguists work their way backward in time, however, both the mode and the availability of recordings become ever more restricted. When it comes to the mode of recordings, the linguistic evidence is confined to printing and writing once we leave behind the modern period and reach back into the premodern period; and, as we work our way further back in history to a time that predates the invention of the printing press in the era of the West European Renaissance, all we have left is the written text. Unfortunately, when it comes to the availability of written texts recording the Greek language before the era of print, not only the number of surviving texts but even the number of the various kinds of surviving texts diminishes significantly.

I make a special point here of distinguishing between the open-endedness of the available evidence of Greek as it is spoken in the present and the restrictedness of availability as we move backward in time. In this light, we need to distinguish further between the number of texts stemming from a given historical era and the number of the various kinds of texts that reflect the Greek language as spoken in that era. A case in point for making such a distinction is the historical era of the Byzantine Empire, which flourished for about a millennium, all the way until the capture of Constantinople in 1453 CE. In the historical era that covers this vast stretch of time, overlapping with and extending even beyond the medieval period of West Europe, the Greek language underwent massive changes, but these changes are now most difficult for linguists to trace because the kinds of discourse that were committed to writing in this era were so heavily influenced by earlier kinds of discourse that dominated Greek civilization in earlier times. For example, the standard prose used for official documentation in the Byzantine era was based not on the everyday Greek language spoken by everyday people, but rather on a form of prose that evolved in a period of Greek civilization generally known as the Second Sophistic movement, culminating in the second and third centuries CE, and this form of prose was in turn based on a still earlier form of prose that culminated in the city-state of Athens in the fourth century BCE (Horrocks [1997] 2010).

In general, the Byzantine civilization of the medieval era is the primary historical context for the preservation of texts from ancient Greek civilization, by way of manuscript traditions. These texts include a sizable representation of works by authors who flourished in the so-called classical period, dated to the fifth and the fourth centuries BCE. Some of the most celebrated of these authors are Pindar, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Herodotus, Thucydides, Plato, and Aristotle. The transmission included even earlier as well as later works. Among the later works are the Septuagint, which was a Greek version of the Hebrew Bible, and the Christian New Testament. Among the earlier works are the Homeric *Iliad* and *Odyssey*. After the Byzantine era, the manuscript traditions of ancient Greek texts were continued by the print culture that began in the era of the West European Renaissance, and the availability of classical Greek texts has been safeguarded in print form ever since, into modern times. Other sources for the ancient Greek language are 1. inscriptions found from all reaches of the ancient Greek-speaking world and 2. papyri found predominantly in Egypt. A vast corpus of Greek inscriptions is easily accessible on line: http://epigraphy.packhum.org/inscriptions/

In the case of papyri, linguists can turn to another important resource on line: http://library.duke.edu/rubenstein/scriptorium/papyrus/texts/greek/introduction.html

For the first time in this presentation, I speak here of documentation in specific historical contexts, and here is where we need to take a second look at the term “documentation” itself. This term presents us with a complication that escapes notice at first sight. In most cases of textual evidence for the history of the Greek language, the actual text that we are reading is intended not as a documentation of some form of communication conveyed by language: rather, it is intended as the communication itself, which can be seen as a special form of language that communicates in its own right. In such cases, as we will see later on, *the communication is its own documentation*, in the sense that the written text can speak in ways that an everyday speaker may not be able to speak.

That said, I turn to something else that further complicates the nature of the textual evidence for the history of the Greek language. This something is the fact that even the everyday speech of Modern Greek today is heavily influenced by written prose traditions stemming from the Byzantine era. This influence affects not only the prose that Modern Greek speakers use in producing official texts of documentation but also their everyday speech, which is pervaded by patterns stemming from a bookish form of prose derived ultimately from Byzantine civilization and known today as καθαρεύουσα, the ‘pure’ language. The other side of the coin is δημοτική, the ‘popular’ language of Modern Greek, which cannot be disentangled from the influence of the concurrent καθαρεύουσα − any more than this “pure” language can ever be completely “purified” of the δημοτική (Horrocks 2010).

That said, the fact still remains that synchronic studies of Modern Greek in all its varieties are a most accurate point of departure for an overall diachronic study of Greek in all its manifestations over the roughly 3,500 years of its documented history. Such a diachronic study of the Greek language ideally depends, of course, on synchronic studies that focus not only on Modern Greek but also on all documented Greek texts as we find them attested throughout the history of Greek civilization.

## 2. A refining of the terms synchronic, diachronic, and historical

In speaking here, just moments ago, about *synchronic* and *diachronic* studies of the Greek language, I am making a distinction between the terms *diachronic* and *historical* in relation to the term *synchronic*. I argue for the necessity of making two kinds of correlation (Nagy 2011 § 10):

1. *diachronic* perspectives need to be correlated with *synchronic* perspectives

2. these two perspectives need to be correlated in turn with *historical* perspectives.

In using the terms *synchronic* and *diachronic*, I follow the definitions of Ferdinand de Saussure ([1916] 1972: 117):

Est synchronique tout ce qui rapporte à l’aspect statique de notre science, diachronique tout ce qui a trait aux évolutions. De même synchronie et diachronie désigneront respectivement un état de langue et une phase d’évolution. [Everything that relates to the static side of our science is synchronic; everything that has to do with evolution is diachronic. Similarly *synchrony* and *diachrony* designate respectively a language-state and an evolutionary phase. (Trans. Baskin 1959: 81)]

I note especially the equation here, in terms of the definitions worked out by Saussure, between the terms *diachronic* and *evolutionary*.

And now I need to add that a *diachronic* or *evolutionary* perspective is not the same thing as a *historical* perspective (Nagy 2011 § 12; Nagy 1996a: 21 fn. 18):

It is a mistake to equate *diachronic* with *historical*, as is often done. Diachrony refers to the potential for evolution *in a structure*, whereas history is not restricted to phenomena that are structurally predictable.

This formulation can be applied in the specific context of explaining a phenomenon I have described as *diachronic skewing* (Nagy 2011 § 14). Here is an example: in Homeric poetry, the narrator refers to his medium as an act of *singing* (as at *Iliad* I 1: ἄειδε) even though the historical evidence indicates that this medium had already become an act of *reciting* (Nagy 1996a: 21).

Here I find it relevant to cite a formulation by the anthropologist Pierre-Yves Jacopin (1988: 35−36): “Both synchrony and diachrony are abstractions extrapolated from a model of reality.” In applying this formulation, I highlight the term *model* (Nagy 2011 § 16):

Both synchronic and diachronic perspectives are a matter of *model building*. We can build *synchronic models* to describe and explain the workings of a structure as we see it attested in a given historical context. We can likewise build *diachronic models* to describe and explain how that given structure may have evolved from one of its phases into other phases. What we have built, however, is a set of models to be tested on historical realities. The models are not the same thing as the realities themselves. And the realities of history as a process are not dependent on such models. History may either confirm or upset any or all aspects of our models, since the contingencies of history do not need to follow the rules of existing structures.

The aim, then, in applying synchronic and diachronic perspectives is *to build synchronic and diachronic models* for the description of linguistic structures and for visualizing the evolution of these structures (Nagy 2011 § 17).

I offer here two different ways of further delimiting these terms *synchronic* and *diachronic*, thus bringing them into sharper focus (Nagy 2011 § 20):

1. The terms *synchronic* and *diachronic* need to be applied consistently from the objective standpoint of an outsider who is thinking about a given structure, not from the subjective standpoint of an insider who is thinking within that structure (Nagy 1996a: 4). Such an objective standpoint enhances the synchronic as well as the diachronic perspectives that are needed for describing structures and for explaining how these structures evolve. This way of looking at a given structure helps avoid the pitfall of assuming that one’s own synchronic or diachronic perspectives are identical with the perspectives of those who were part of the culture in which that structure was historically anchored. Such an assumption runs the risk of misreading the historical context in which the structure is attested.

2. Whereas synchronic and diachronic perspectives are needed to describe a given structure as it exists at a given time and as it evolves through time, historical perspectives are needed to describe what actually happened to that structure. As I noted already, what happened in history can be unpredictable, since we cannot predict the contingencies of history. So, when it comes to reconstructing what happened to a given structure, it is not enough to use a purely diachronic perspective. As I have also already noted, a purely diachronic perspective is restricted to phenomena that are structurally predictable.

And now I add a third delimitation (Nagy 2011 § 21):

3. In analyzing a given structure, synchronic and diachronic perspectives need to be applied before historical judgments or prejudgments can be made.

This third delimitation is especially important in situations where we find little or no historical evidence for earlier attestations of a given structure. I am addressing here one of the biggest problems faced by historians when they try to view structures over time (Nagy 2011 § 22):

If they apply only a historical perspective as they reconstruct a given structure backward in time, back to the era when that structure is actually documented, they find themselves limited to the realities they find in that era. And the only way they can reconstruct further back in time is to find further documentation stemming from earlier eras.

By contrast, a diachronic perspective provides also for the reconstruction of realities that are historically undocumented. And reconstruction from a diachronic perspective is not restricted to the hindsight of history (Nagy 2011 § 23):

A diachronic perspective not only makes it possible to *reconstruct backward in time* by tracing the evolution of a given structure back to undocumented phases of that structure. It also makes it possible to *reconstruct forward in time*.

In previous work (Nagy 2008: 19), I applied the concept of *reconstructing backward and forward in time* with reference to the term *Common Greek*, which follows a *diachronic model* developed by linguists. I offer here a summary (Nagy 2011 §§ 24−25):

I am speaking here about the historical evidence for a chronological demarcation between pre-documented and documented eras of the Greek language. Experts used to place this demarcation somewhere around the eighth century BCE, which is the era when alphabetic writing was first being introduced into the Greek-speaking world. The Greek language as it existed in what was understood to be the pre-documented era on the farther side of this demarcation could only be reconstructed diachronically, all the way back to a hypothetical proto-language known to linguists as *Common Greek*. This proto-language, Common Greek, is not a historical reality but a construct, a *diachronic model*. But then a major shift in demarcation took place, signaled by the decipherment of Linear B, which was a system of syllabic writing that dates back to the second millennium BCE. Once the decipherment revealed that the language written in this script was an earlier form of Greek, the documented era of the Greek language needed to be pushed back into the second millennium BCE, and this newly demarcated older era could now reveal new historical facts about the language. These new facts in some ways confirmed but in other ways contradicted the reconstructions achieved by way of diachronic perspectives that had already been developed before the decipherment of Linear B (Nagy 2008: 33; see also Nagy 1969). Those previous reconstructions, which were dominated by the hindsight of later history, needed to be modified in the light of earlier history. So now a new *diachronic model* of *Common Greek* needed to be built by way of *reconstructing backward* in time, even farther back than before. And, now that an earlier historical phase of Greek had been discovered, this discovery required re-adjustments in how we *reconstruct forward in time* from that earlier phase to later phases.

From this example, we can see that the diachronic process of *reconstructing forward as well as backward in time* depends on the data provided by historical evidence. But the *actual reconstruction of structures* depends primarily on diachronic and synchronic perspectives and only secondarily on a historical perspective. I say this because the historical perspective works only by *hindsight*, whereas the diachronic perspective allows for *foresight* as well, so to speak, by way of the procedure I describe here as *reconstructing forward in time*.

To show how this procedure works, I will now highlight another *diachronic model*. This model is yet another construct built by linguists, and this one is even broader in scope than the model of *Common Greek*. I have in mind here the diachronic model of *Indo-European* or *Common Indo-European* or *Proto-Indo-European*. I focus here on an example of what kinds of things we can find when we *reconstruct forward as well as backward* in Indo-European linguistics (Nagy 2011 § 26):

The example centers on the etymology of the Greek word *pontos* (πόντος) ‘sea’, which is cognate with the following words in other Indo-European languages: Latin *pōns* ‘bridge’, Armenian *hun* ‘ford’, Old Church Slavonic *рǫtǐ* and Old Prussian *pintis* ‘path’, Sanskrit *pánthāḥ* and Avestan *pantå* ‘path’. When we reconstruct all these words backward in time, back to an undocumented common proto-language known to linguists as Common Indo-European or Proto-Indo-European, such *reconstruction backward in time* does not help us fully comprehend the semantic relationship of the meaning ‘sea’ in Greek with such divergent meanings as ‘bridge’, ‘ford’, and ‘path’ in the other Indo-European languages. It is only after we *reconstruct forward in time*, taking into account all the *comparative evidence* we derive from the cognate languages that we factored into our reconstruction backward in time, that we can comprehend more fully the convergent meaning that unifies diachronically the divergent meanings of these words. This convergent meaning has to do with *a crossing, over a dangerous body of water or over some other dangerous zone, which sacralizes the one who succeeds in achieving such a dangerous crossing* (Nagy 2008: 48−49; following Benveniste 1954/1966: 296−298). Only then, only after we have *reconstructed forward in time*, can we understand the contexts of the word *pontos* (πόντος) ‘sea’ in the earliest attested phases of Greek poetry, where we see expressions of dread about dangerous sea crossings and references to the sacralizing effect of such crossings. Further evidence comes from the derivative form *Hellēs-pontos* (Ἑλλήσ-ποντος), which is the name of a famous strait that we know as the Hellespont and which means etymologically ‘the crossing of Helle’, referring to a myth about a dangerous crossing of this strait by a girl named Helle and by her brother, who are being carried across the dangerous waters by a ram with a golden fleece: the girl falls off the ram and drowns in the Hellespont while her brother succeeds in crossing the strait and is thus sacralized (Nagy [1979] 1999: 339−340).

This example shows that *diachronic analysis*, by way of *reconstructing forward in time*, can enhance not only *historical analysis* but also *synchronic analysis*, since a purely synchronic analysis of the attested contexts of *pontos* (πόντος) would yield only the meaning ‘sea’. The underlying sense of a dangerous crossing that sacralizes would be impossible to recover without applying a diachronic perspective (Nagy 2011 § 27).

## 3. Distinguishing text and performance

The written texts that linguists use as documentary evidence for the synchronic, diachronic, and historical study of the Greek language need to be viewed in a variety of ways, depending on the varied reasons for the production of such texts in the historical past. For an understanding of these reasons, we need to distinguish between the reading of words in a text and the performance of words that may or may not be recorded as a text.

I start with the case of the Linear B tablets, already mentioned, which represent the earliest attested form of writing in the Greek language, dating as far back as the fourteenth or even fifteenth century BCE. The purpose of these texts was to record inventories of various administrative activities that were controlled or at least overseen by the bureaucracies that controlled the administrative centers of the so-called “Mycenaean” empire − centers that are nowadays commonly described as “palaces.” At a later point in my presentation, I will return in more detail to these texts written in the script known as Linear B, which was a syllabary. Here I note simply the fact that these tablets were meant to record facts. In this sense, the Linear B tablets are a shining example of “documentation.” A telling fact about these tablets is that Michael Ventris, who deciphered the Linear B syllabary in the year 1952, used the word “documents” in the title of the book that he co-authored with the linguist John Chadwick about the discovery procedures of the decipherment, *Documents in Mycenaean Greek* (Ventris and Chadwick 1956).

Relevant here is the archaeological evidence for the use of parchment by scribes writing in an earlier and related script, Linear A, at the administrative center of Zakro in Crete (Weingarten 1983). These scribes, who were speakers of a non-Greek language, wrote on parchment for making permanent archival records, whereas they wrote on clay tablets for making temporary records. I infer that the scribes writing in Linear B during the Mycenaean era followed an analogous procedure: they would write their temporary records on clay tablets, and these records would then be transferred at the end of a given fiscal year from clay to parchment (the notion of a fiscal year is indicated by references in the Linear B tablets to the current year as opposed to the immediately preceding and following years). There is an irony to be noted here: when the administrative centers of the Mycenaean era were destroyed by fires, the temporary records of the Linear B scribes were made permanent for archaeologists because they were baked and thus preserved by the same fires that must have destroyed the permanent records recorded on parchment (Nagy 2008).

But we must reckon also with other kinds of texts − texts that were meant for the recording not of facts, as in the case of the Linear B tablets, but of various forms of verbal art − namely, of song, poetry, and prose. In the case of the texts that recorded such verbal art, the primary reason for writing down the words produced by way of song, poetry, and prose was not necessarily an intent to preserve the content of these words as a form of documentation. In some notable cases, such content was preserved not by way of writing but by way of oral traditions of performing song, poetry, and prose. The most notable of all such cases was Homeric poetry, as represented by the over 15,000 verses of the *Iliad* and the over 12,000 verses of the *Odyssey*. The textual tradition of this massive corpus of verses preserves one of the earliest attestations of Greek poetry recorded in writing (though there are poetic inscriptions that are even earlier in date: Nagy 1996b: 34−36). The prestige of this tradition was enormous in the history of Greek civilization − but not because the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey* had been written down. At least initially, the preservation of Homeric poetry was maintained by way of oral traditions of performance, not by way of writing. Only eventually, toward the end of the sixth century BCE, according to my estimation, were the verses of the Homeric *Iliad* and *Odyssey* written down (Nagy 2008/2009, 2009/2010). And, even then, the purpose for recording these verses as a text was primarily to help remember how to perform them, not to read them. In short, the performance of Homeric poetry was primary, and the writing down of this poetry as a text was secondary.

The terms *performance* and *text*, as a pair, cannot be considered the equivalent of another pair of terms, *orality* and *literacy*. Still, there is a link between *performance* and *orality*, matching the obvious link between *text* and *literacy*. In what follows, I propose to consider these matching links.

The concept of *orality* stems from ethnographic descriptions of *oral poetry* in particular and of *oral tradition* in general (Nagy 2001). A basic work on these two concepts is *The Singer of Tales*, by Albert B. Lord ([1960] 2000). This book documents the research of Lord’s teacher, Milman Parry, on oral traditions in the former Yugoslavia, 1933−1935 (Parry 1971). Parry was a professor of ancient Greek, seeking new answers to the so-called *Homeric Question*. Basically, the “question” came down to this: were the Homeric *Iliad* and *Odyssey* composed with or without the aid of writing? Parry’s project, the comparing of Homeric poetry with the living oral traditions of South Slavic heroic poetry, led him to conclude that the Homeric texts were indeed the products of oral composition. Parry’s research was continued by his student, Albert Lord, whose *Singer of Tales* represents the legacy of their combined efforts.

By the classical period, in the fifth century BCE, Homeric poetry was static or fixed, not fluid. This fixity has led to the inference that this poetry had always been a written text. The term *written text*, however, is too imprecise for describing what had been a process of gradual fixation in the ongoing tradition of performing Homeric poetry. This process can be described in terms of a progression from *transcript* to *script*.

By *transcript* I mean the broadest possible category of written text: a transcript can be a record of performance, even an aid for performance, but not the equivalent of performance (Nagy 1996b: 34−36, 65−69). We must distinguish a *transcript* from an *inscription*, which can traditionally refer to itself in early phases of the Greek evidence as an equivalent of performance (Nagy 1996b: 34−36). As for *script*, I mean a narrower category, where the written text is a prerequisite for performance (Nagy 1996b: 32−34).

In considering such categories, we need to ask what happens when oral traditions become written traditions − or when oral traditions come into contact with pre-existing written traditions. In the history of scholarship on this question, the work of Parry and Lord is pivotal. Their fieldwork on the living oral traditions of the former Yugoslavia gave them an opportunity to test the living interactions of oral and literary traditions. They observed that the prestige of writing as a technology, and of the culture of literacy that it fostered, tended to destabilize the culture of oral traditions − in the historical context they were studying. What they observed, however, was strictly a point of comparison with other possible test cases, not some kind of universalizing formulation (Mitchell and Nagy 2000: xiii). For example, Lord himself makes it clear in his later work that there exist many cultures where literary traditions do not cause the destabilization of oral traditions and can even coexist with them (Lord 1991; **see** also especially Lord 1986). In general, the textualization or *Verschriftung* of any given oral tradition needs to be distinguished from *Verschriftlichung* − that is, from the evolution of any given culture of literacy, any given *Schriftlichkeit* (Oesterreicher 1993).

For Parry and Lord, the opposition of *literacy* and *orality* − of *Schriftlichkeit* and *Mündlichkeit* − is a cultural variable, not a universal. Moreover, their fieldwork experiments led them to think of literacy and orality as *cognitive* variables as well (Mitchell and Nagy 2000: xiv).

Despite this stance of Parry and Lord, it has been claimed − many times and in many ways − that the Parry-Lord “theory” is founded on a hard-and-fast distinction between *orality* and *literacy*. These claims stem from unfamiliarity with the ethnographic dimension of Parry’s and Lord’s work, and, more generally, from ignorance about the observable mechanics and aesthetics of oral traditions (Mitchell and Nagy 2000: xiv).

Humanists today may be tempted to romanticize literacy as the key to “literature”, often equated with “high” culture (on empirical approaches to distinctions between “high” and “low” culture, as occasionally formalized in distinctions between oral and written traditions, see Bausinger 1980). And yet, the only universal distinction between oral and literary traditions is the historical anteriority of the first to the second. Beyond this obvious observation, it is pointless to insist on any universalizing definitions for the “oral” of “oral tradition.” “Oral tradition” and “oral poetry” are terms that depend on the concepts of “written tradition” and “written poetry.” In cultures that do not depend on the technology of writing, the concept of “orality” is meaningless (Lord 1995: 105 n. 26). From the standpoint of comparative ethnography, “*Written* is not something that is not *oral*; rather it is something in addition to being oral, and that additional something varies from society to society” (Nagy [1990] 1994: § 16). The technology of writing has nothing to do with whether there can or cannot be poetics or rhetoric. Poetics and rhetoric can exist without writing.

It is needless to posit a dichotomy between *orality* and *text* in the history of Greek civilization. But the question remains: is there a dichotomy between *performance* and *text*? To find an answer, we must consider how the technology of writing relates to the production of texts. Further, we must consider the rationale behind the production of texts.

As we are about to see, the text was meant not only for *reading* as we understand the phenomenon of reading. It was meant also for *performance*.

This formulation can be justified on the basis of observations made by Aristotle in his *Poetics* concerning the reading of texts. As we will see presently, these observations show that the ancient Greeks, including Aristotle himself, regarded *reading* as a *reenactment of live speech*. Such a sense of reenactment was driven by their writing system.

When Aristotle in the *Poetics* (1456b: 20−38) speaks about syllables and about the consonants and vowels that delimit them, he is doing far more than that. By hindsight, we can say he is demonstrating a remarkably accurate linguistic understanding of the sound system or phonology of the Greek language as spoken in his time, the fourth century BCE (Nagy 2009a: 419−420). Just as remarkable is the phonological accuracy of the writing system inherited by Aristotle and his contemporaries in reproducing the language that went into the texts they produced. That system is what we know as the Greek alphabet, which had been derived many centuries earlier from the Phoenician alphabet. The ancient Greek text, as produced by way of alphabetic writing, was a most accurate sound-recording of the ancient Greek language.

## 4. Alphabetic literacy

From the very earliest times, the Greek alphabet excelled in phonological accuracy. The same cannot be said about the Linear B syllabary, which can represent syllables only by way of signs that stand for vowel or consonant+vowel, since this syllabary has no signs that stand for vowel+consonant. And the phonological accuracy of the Greek alphabet cannot even be matched by the earlier Phoenician alphabet from which it was derived. The writing system of the Phoenicians, in the course of its evolution, had dispensed with the representation of vowels. We see the same principle in the writing system of Hebrew, a language closely related to Phoenician. It was a loss of phonological accuracy for the alphabets of these two Semitic languages to dispense with vowels, but there was a compensatory gain in morphological accuracy. That is because, in both Phoenician and Hebrew morphology, the consonants in the “root” of any word were a *constant* while the vowels were a *variable*. So the morphological integrity of the individual word could be maintained by writing only the consonants in the Semitic alphabets − provided that each word was divided from the next. By contrast, in the process of borrowing the writing system of the Phoenicians, the writing system of the Greeks developed a way to represent vowels.

The historical consequences are vast. In effect, the ancient Greeks thus developed the first “pure” alphabetic system. One linguist (Gelb 1963: 184) has described this development as “the last important step in the history of writing.” He adds that, “from the Greek period up to the present, nothing new has happened in the inner structural development of writing.” In other words, the Greek alphabet “conquered the world,” since “we write consonants and vowels in the same way as the ancient Greeks did.”

From one perspective, this development can be counted as a shining example of the Greek “miracle” (for an overall critique of such a way of thinking about the Greeks, see Gernet 1983). From another perspective, it is simply a contingency − something that happens at the right time and at the right place. In this case, what happened is that certain consonants as pronounced in Phoenician were simply not heard in Greek. The prime example is the Phoenician consonant /’/, a “glottal stop” that was represented by the Phoenician letter {’} called /’ālep/. The principle is acrophonic: {’} as in /’ālep/ meaning ‘ox’, {B} as in /bêṯ/ meaning ‘house’, and so on. The principle applies to this day, as when we say {B} as in /boy/. But the consonant /’/ of the syllable /’a/ as spelled by the letter called /’ālep/ in Phoenician was simply not heard by native speakers of ancient Greek, whereas the consonant {b} of the syllable [be] as spelled by the letter called /bêṯ/ in Phoenician was clearly heard, as we see in the Greek letter {B} for /bēta/. So the Greek letter {A} for /alpha/, borrowed from the Phoenician letter {’} for /’ālep/, represented acrophonically the vowel /a/ of /alpha/, not the consonant /’/ of /’ālep/. The principle applies to this day, as when we say {A} as in /apple/. Similarly, the Greek letters {E} and {O} for the vowels /e/ and /o/ came from Phoenician letters for the consonants {h} and {‘} in word-initial sequences of /he-/ and /‘a-/ that were heard as /e-/ and /o-/ respectively in ancient Greek. Finally, the Phoenician letter {H}, pronounced as /ḥêṯ/, was heard as /ēta/ by speakers of East Ionian Greek dialects that had no word-initial /h-/, while it was heard as /hēta/ by speakers of other dialects; so, thanks to the loss of word-initial /h-/ in their dialect, the East Ionians gained another vowel in their alphabet − a vowel that was borrowed only later into the writing systems of other Greeks (Nagy 2008: 37).

In early Greek alphabetic writing, the practice of dividing words from each other by way of blank spaces or special marks is well attested, as we see from inscriptions dating from before the classical period of the fifth century BCE. But this practice, parallel to what we find in texts written in Semitic alphabets, became obsolescent with the advent of the classical period, by the time of the fifth century BCE. The dividing of words from each other in writing was replaced by the practice of *scriptio continua*, which is a mode of writing that runs words together, and this practice persisted all the way through the 9ᵗʰ and 10ᵗʰ centuries CE. From then on we see a shifting back to the practice of dividing the words from each other by way of blank spaces, and this newer practice continues to this day in the editing of classical Greek texts. So the question is, why was *scriptio continua* a basic feature of ancient Greek literacy for a period that covers well over a thousand years?

For the modern reader, the continuous flow of letters in *scriptio continua*, without blank spaces between words, actually impedes the cognitive flow of reading itself. We can pick out the words more readily when we see them separated from each other by blank spaces. I use here the metaphor of *picking out the words* because it applies to the cognitive process of reading in the ancient world as well. That is what we see, for example, from the meaning ‘pick out, select’ inherent in the use of *legein* (λέγειν) in referring to the ancient practice of *reading out loud* from a text (as in Plato *Theaetetus* 143c and in the Attic orators; Nagy 2009a: 420−421). The ancient Greek reader, while *reading out loud*, has to *pick out* the words. Granted, the reader also has to *pick out* the overall meaning from the continuous stream of letters that are being read, but the fact is that the basic unit of meaning for readers of Greek in ancient as well as in modern times is still the word. So by now the question deepens: why were words run together in *scriptio continua* if they impeded the cognitive flow of reading?

The answer is simple: *scriptio continua* promoted the phonological realism of continuity in speaking or singing or reciting in ways that people really spoke and sang and recited. Stopping at the wrong place between words could impede the flow, the continuity. Stopping could only be allowed at the right place, that is, at the end of a word that coincides with the end of a phrase or a clause, with the end of a colon or a verse. That would be phonologically right. Stopping elsewhere would be phonologically wrong, ruining the rhythmic and melodic contour of the phrasing (Nagy 2009a: 421; see also Nagy 2009b).

The systematization of when to stop and when not to stop between words is evident in some surviving ancient texts. We see a striking illustration in a set of papyri dating from the second century CE featuring the songs of Bacchylides, a poet who flourished in the early fifth century BCE: the formatting of these texts shows most clearly that *scriptio continua* is being coordinated with the placements of line-endings that correspond to the ends of cola (Nagy 2000).

Even if the process of reading such texts in *scriptio continua* was cognitively more difficult than the process of reading the more recent *scriptio discontinua* as simulated in the printed pages of modern editions, the older way of formatting offered the advantage of reading something that was far closer to the reality of live performance.

Viewed in this light, the device of *scriptio continua* can be counted as yet another aspect of the overall accuracy and precision of the Greek writing system in representing the reality of Greek speech and song. Maybe it was no “miracle,” but it was a most effective device for bringing ancient Greek song and speech back to life for those who listened to it being read back to them out loud.

It can be said that the experience of seeing words run together in *scriptio continua* impedes not so much the general process of reading but the specific process of “silent reading” (Saenger 1997: 11). This term *silent reading* refers to a way of reading that dispenses with the ancient practice of *reading out loud*. There has been a long debate over the validity of such a dichotomy, without a clear outcome (Gavrilov 1997). This much is certain, however: from the standpoint of cognitive psychology, the mental process involved in reading out loud requires in its own right an element of “silent reading” − since the sequence of cognition in reading letters one after the other is moved forward by the reader’s hearing the actual sequence of what is being sounded out loud. That is because this sequence of letters serially turning into sounds is given meaning by the serial sounding out of words that take shape as the sequence continues, helping the reader keep moving ahead to the finish.

What I just said applies even if the reader mechanically sounds out letters without at first “recognizing” the meaning of what is being sounded out. For the process of reading out loud to be successful, what really matters is that the sequence of letters being read out loud must be “recognized” *ex post facto*. The sequence of sounds being read out loud by the reader is what drives the reader’s process of “recognition”. Such is the idea expressed by the word *anagignōskein* (αναγιγνώσκειν), which means ‘read out loud’ and, more basically, ‘recognize’.
