---
title: "Chapter 2 §2.4 — PIE derivational morphology"
author: "Don Ringe"
date: "2024"
source_type: born-digital
extraction_date: "2026-05-07"
source_file: "ringe-2024-linguistic-roots-ancient-greek.pdf"
chunk: "§2.4"
pages: "76-80"
---

## 2.4 PIE derivational morphology

The system of PIE word formation was also very elaborate; Brugmann (1906) spends more than 500 pages listing and exemplifying its formal machinery. The following paragraphs discuss only some of the most important derivational types.

### 2.4.1 Compounding

In the more archaic IE daughter languages one encounters combinations of verbs and adverbs (or ‘preverbs’) that exhibit meanings which are not transparently compositional. Evidently PIE possessed such ‘compound verbs’, but it is not clear that any of their idiosyncratic meanings in the daughters should be projected back into PIE. For instance, reflexes of Core IE *pró bʰer- exhibit a wide range of derived meanings, some of which are shared by more than one daughter language: ‘offer, present’ in Sanskrit and Greek, ‘reveal, display’ in Greek and Latin, ‘carry off ’ in Greek and Gothic, and so on; but since all can be derived straightforwardly from the etymological meaning *‘carry forward’, the latter could easily have been the only meaning of the phrase in Core IE. In all the daughters at least some of these phrases have become lexemes with idiosyncratic meanings even if they are not yet single phonological words (like Modern English ‘get up’, ‘get out’, etc., though the English examples are of much more recent origin). In most attested IE languages these compounds have also undergone univerbation to single phonological words, but in the three that are well attested earliest—Hittite, Vedic Sanskrit, and Homeric Greek—univerbation is still in progress, and the pattern is rather different in each. It therefore seems most likely that these were still phrases in PIE and all its daughters down through Central IE. By contrast, PIE nominal compounds, including adjectives and nouns that were derived from compound verbs, were typically single phonological words. Adjectives could be preceded by a wide variety of adverbial prefixes, of which the most widely attested are * n̥ - ‘un-’, *h₁su- ‘good’, *dus- ‘bad’, and *sēmi- ‘half ’. There seem to have been several types of compound nouns; they are usually classified by meaning according to a system worked out by the Sanskrit grammarians more than two millennia ago. Determinative compounds were one of the most important types. In a determinative the final member of the compound is a noun which refers directly to what the compound denotes; the preceding member can be an adjective, as in the modern English example blackbird (a kind of bird which is black), or a noun, as in werewolf (a wolf who is also a man; cf. OE wer ‘man’). Exocentric compounds, often referred to as bahuvrīhi compounds (the Sanskrit term), were the other most important type. In a bahuvrīhi the final noun characterizes, but does not refer to, what the compound denotes; a typical English example is tenderfoot (literally, a

<!-- page: 77 -->

person whose feet are tender (because (s)he isn’t used to backpacking—NOT a tender foot, which would be the case if the compound were a determinative). Few actual PIE examples of these compounds are reconstructable, for the simple reason that nominal compounding remained exuberantly productive in most of the daughters (including Greek), with new compounds steadily replacing older ones. But we can at least reconstruct the Central IE compound adjective *ń̥ dʰgʷʰitos ‘imperishable’ (and even a phrase *ń̥ dʰgʷʰitom ḱléwos ‘imperishable fame’, with reflexes both in the Rigveda and in Homer), and several scholars have seen that Homeric Gk ῑ̓ oχέαιρα, an epithet of Artemis, is probably the same word as the Vedic Skt bahuvrīhi íṣuhastas ‘arrowhand’, i.e. ‘with arrows in his/her hand(s)’; the PIE word must have been something like (fem.) *ísuǵʰesrih₂ (Heubeck 1956, Peters 1980: 223–8, both with references). Also important were agentive nominal compounds in which the final element was a verb root and the prior element the object of the verb; this is the type exemplified by Vedic Skt vr̥ tra-hán- ‘slayer of Vr̥ tra’ and Lat. au-cep-s ‘bird-catcher’.

### 2.4.2 PIE derivational suffixes

The suffixes by which verbs were derived from other verbs and nominals are listed in 2.3.3 (i), since the result of such derivation was in every case a distinctive type of aspect stem. Nominal derivation was much more elaborate, as the following sections will show.

### 2.4.2 (i) PIE noun-forming suffixes

The proto-vr̥ ddhi derivational process is described in 2.2.4 (i), since it involved a (very unusual) morphologized phonological rule. The collective suffix *-h₂- is discussed at the end of 2.3.4 (ii), because it was often integrated into noun paradigms as a neuter nom.-acc. pl. ending. In some cases collectives might have been reinterpreted as feminine singulars; in many of the daughters, including Greek, a large proportion of feminine *-ah₂-stems belong to derivational classes that could have originated as collectives. Large and productive classes of thematic nouns with o-grade roots (which I symbolize as R(o)) were formed from verb stems. The type R(ó)-o- (masc.) and its collective R(o)-áh₂- (fem.) denoted the action of the verb; the type R(o)-ó- (masc.), which was probably restricted to the final element of compounds, denoted the agent. Typical examples include *ǵónh₁-o-s, collective *ǵonh₁-áh₂ ‘begetting, birth, offspring’ (Gk γoνoς, γoνή ´ ‘offspring’; Skt jánas ‘creature, person’, janā́ ‘birth’), *-ǵonh₁-ó-s ‘begetter’ (Gk compound τεκνoγ´oνoς ‘begetting children’ with typically shifted accent), all derived from *ǵenh₁- ‘to beget, to bear (a child)’; *dʰrógʰos ‘(act of ) running’ (Gk τρ´oχoς ‘circular course’), *dʰrogʰós ‘runner,

<!-- page: 78 -->

wheel’ (apparently decompound; cf. Gk τρoχ´oς, OIr. droch, both ‘wheel’), from *dʰregʰ- ‘to run’; *sóngʷʰos ‘chant’ (PGmc * sangʷaz ‘song’), collective * songʷʰáh₂ (Gk ὀμφή ‘divine voice’) from * sengʷʰ- ‘to chant’. Similar collectives were also made with zero-grade roots, e.g. *bʰugáh₂ ‘flight, escape’ (Gk φυγή, Lat. fuga) from *bʰewg- ‘to run away, to flee’. Other types of nouns derived with the thematic vowel also existed, though they may not have been productive; obvious examples are the neuters *yugóm ‘yoke’ (Hitt. iukan, Skt yugám, etc.) from *yewg- ‘to join’ and *wérǵom ‘work’ (Gk ἔργoν, PGmc *werką) from *werǵ- ‘to work’. As can be seen from the cognates cited, nouns denoting actions tend also to denote the results of those actions; there is no clear dividing line between them. Neuter s-stems with accented e-grade roots were also action/result nouns. Wellattested examples include *ǵénh₁os ~ *ǵénh₁es- ‘family, lineage’ (Skt jánas, Gk γένoς, Lat. genus) from *ǵénh₁- ‘to beget’; *ḱléwos ~ *ḱléwes- ‘fame’ (Skt ´srávas, Gk κλέoς) from *ḱlew- ‘to hear’; *wékʷos ~ *wékʷes- ‘word’ (Skt vácas, Gk ἔπoς) from *wekʷ- ‘to say’; etc. Another class of action/result nouns were proterokinetic neuters in * -men-. Typical examples include *néwmn̥ υμα, Lat. nˉ ~ *numén- ‘nod’ (Gk νε˜ umen) from *new- ‘to nod’ and *séh₁mn̥ ~ *sh₁mén- ‘seed’ (Lat. sēmen, OCS sěmę) from *seh₁- ‘to sow’. This class seems to have made amphikinetic collectives; thus the collective
of the latter was *séh₁mˉo ~ *sh₁mn- (OHG sāmo).
Still another group of these nouns were masculine, with the thematic suffix *-mo-. Two ablaut classes, R(ó)-mo- and R(0)-mó-, were well represented. To the former belonged, e.g., *tórmos ‘borehole’ (Gk τ´oρμoς ‘socket’, PGmc *þarmaz ‘intestine’) from *terh₁- ‘to bore’; an example of the latter is *dʰuh₂mós ‘smoke’ (Skt dʰ ˉ umus) from *dʰuh₂- ‘to smoke’. umás, Lat. fˉ Two large and productive groups of action nouns, feminines in *-ti- and masculines in *-tu-, had proterokinetic inflection; caseforms of both developed into infinitives in various daughter languages. Typical examples include * gʷém-ti-s ~ * gʷm̥ -téy- ‘step’ (Skt gátis, Gk βάσις; cf. Lat. con-venti-oˉ, Goth. ga-qumþ-s ‘assembly’, lit. ‘coming together’); *mér-ti-s ~ * mr̥ -téy- ‘death’ (Lat. mors, morti-, Lith. mirtìs); *pér-tu-s ~ * pr̥ -téw- ‘crossing’ (Av. pərətuš; Lat. portus ‘port’, PGmc *ferþuz ‘fjord’ and *furduz ‘ford’). Additional examples have been cited in 2.3.4 (ii). Neuter nouns denoting instruments were formed with four similar suffixes, *-tro-, *-tlo-, *-dʰro-, and *-dʰlo-; the root seems usually to have been accented and e-grade. Typical examples include *h₂árh₃trom ‘plow’ (Gk ἄρoτρoν, OIr. arathar); *póh₃tlom ‘drinking-cup’ (Lat. pˉ *kréydʰrom ‘sieve’ (Lat. crībrum); oculum); *syúHdʰlom ‘awl’ (OCS šilo; the collective appears in Lat. sˉubula). Masculine agent nouns were made with a suffix *-ter-; both amphikinetic and hysterokinetic inflection seem to be reconstructable, though the accent and ablaut relations have become confused in the daughters. An example of the former is *ǵénh₁tˉor ‘parent’ (Gk γενέτωρ, Lat. genitor); the latter underlies such examples as Gk δoτήρ ‘giver’.

<!-- page: 79 -->

Abstract nouns were derived from adjectives with a variety of suffixes. There was a large group in *-tah₂, e.g. *h₂yuHn̥ táh₂ ‘youth’ (Lat. iuventa, Goth. junda). At least some of these nouns made to o-stem adjectives ended in *-étah₂; cf. e.g. Skt nagnátā ‘nakedness’ (to nagnás ‘naked’) and Goth. hauhiþa ‘height’ (to hauhs ‘high’). Also well attested is a suffix *-tāt- (*-tah₂t-?), e.g. in *néwotāt-s ‘newness’ (Lat. novitās; Gk νε´oτης ‘youth’).

### 2.4.2 (ii) PIE adjective-forming suffixes

An extensive derivational system called the Caland system (after the Sanskritist who first noticed some of the connections) can be reconstructed for PIE. At the center of the Caland system were proterokinetic adjectives in *-u-, isofunctional thematic adjectives in *-ró- with zero-grade roots, and adjective stems in *-i- (likewise with zero-grade roots) that appear in compounds. (The system also included, for example, neuter s-stem action nouns (see 2.4.2 (i)) and derived statives/fientives (see 2.3.3 (i)).) Occasionally a complete set of such adjectives can be reconstructed for PIE. For instance, *h₂r̥ ǵ-ró-s ‘white’ survives in Vedic Skt r̥ jrás ‘shining, swift’ and Homeric Gk ἀργ´oς ‘bright’; the synonymous u-stem *h₂árǵ-u- ~ *h₂r̥ ǵ-éw- is attested in Toch. B ārkwi; and the compounding stem *h₂r̥ ǵi- appears in Homeric Gk pl. ἀργίπoδες ‘swift-footed’ (lit. *‘sparklingfoots’) and Skt r̥ jipyás ‘eagle’ (lit. *‘white-backed’; the second element is the zero grade of *op- ‘back’, cf. Aischylos Agamemnon 115).⁶⁹ (The i-stem may not originally have been confined to compounds, to judge from Hitt. harkis ‘white’.) For ‘deep’ we are likewise able to reconstruct both PIE *dʰubrós (cf. Toch. B tapre ‘high’) and *dʰéwbus ~ *dʰubéw- (cf. Lith. dubùs ‘hollow’; apparently transferred into the thematic class in PGmc *deupaz ‘deep’). More often one member of a Caland word-family survives especially well; for instance, there are widespread reflexes of *h₁rudʰrós ‘red’ (Gk ἐρυθρ´oς, Lat. ruber, late Church Slavonic rŭdrŭ, Toch. B ratre) and of * gʷráh₂u-s ~ * gʷr̥ h₂áw- ‘heavy’ (Skt gurús, Gk βαρύς, Lat. gravis, Goth. kaúrus). The Caland system was a system of ‘primary’ derivation, operating on roots. The most important PIE ‘secondary’ adjective suffix, forming adjectives from nouns, was thematic *-yó-. The thematic vowel of an underlying noun was zeroed before this suffix. For instance, from *kóros ‘cutting, section, division’ (OPers. kāra ‘people, army’; Lith. kãras ‘war’) was formed *kóryos ‘detached’, substantivized in the northern languages to mean ‘detachment, war party’ (Lith. kãrias, PGmc *harjaz ‘army’; OIr. cuire ‘company, host’); from *h₂áǵros ‘meadow, field’ (Skt ájras, Gk ἀγρ´oς, Lat. ager, PGmc *akraz) was formed *h₂áǵrios ‘characteristic of meadows/fields’ (Skt ajryás; Gk ἄγριoς ‘wild’); and so on. Otherwise the suffix was simply added to the noun stem, e.g. *diwyós ‘heavenly’ (Skt divyás,
⁶⁹ That PIE * op- ~ *ep- might have meant ‘(animal’s) back’ was suggested to me by Warren Cowgill
ca. 1980.

<!-- page: 80 -->

Homeric Gk δῖoς) from *dyew- ‘sky’, *ph₂triós ‘fatherly’ (Skt pítryas, Gk πάτριoς, Lat. patrius) from *ph₂ter- ‘father’, etc. Verbal adjectives with zero-grade roots were derived by means of the thematic suffixes *-tó-, *-nó-, and *-wó-. The last of these seems to have been rare, though an example which survived very widely was * gʷih₃wós ‘alive’ (Skt jīvás, Lat. vīvos, PGmc *kʷikʷaz, etc.). By contrast, *-tó- became the suffix of perfect participles in Latin, and both *-tó- and *-nó- acquired a similar function in Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, and Germanic. There seems to have been a system of contrastive adjective suffixes in PIE. Adjectives in *-ero- apparently meant ‘X (as opposed to its antonym)’; those in * -mo- or * -m̥ o- meant ‘X (as opposed to everything else)’. Typical examples are *éperos ‘behind’ (Skt áparas; neut. in OIr. prep. íar ‘after’) and * pr̥ Hmós ‘furthest forward’ (Lith. pìrmas; remodeled in PGmc *frumo˭ ‘first’). There were also forms of these suffixes extended with *-t-, namely *-tero-, e.g. in *énteros ‘inside’ (Skt ántaras; Lat. comparative interior ‘further in’), and *-tm̥ o-, e.g. in *éntm̥ os ‘inmost’ (Skt ántamas, Lat. intimus). There was an important class of athematic adjectives in *-went- meaning ‘having X’ (where X is the noun to which the suffix was added); cf. e.g. Skt putrá-vant- ‘having sons’ (putrá-s ‘son’), Gk χαρί-εντ- ‘graceful, lovely’ (χάρι-ς ‘grace, loveliness’). This class is well represented in Anatolian, Indo-Iranian, Greek, and Tocharian (a distribution which guarantees its antiquity, even though specific examples are hard to reconstruct). Finally, it is clear that two formally similar but functionally distinct suffixes have been important in the development of the daughter languages. One, apparently underlyingly */-en-/, was used to ‘individualize’ adjectives; it appears in Latin cognomina (originally nicknames) such as Catoˉ ‘the Shrewd’ (catus ‘shrewd’). The other, underlyingly */-Hen-/, had a function similar to *-went- (see the preceding paragraph); it is well represented in Indo-Iranian (Hoffmann 1955) and appears in Latin cognomina such as Nāsoˉ ‘Bignose’ (*‘having a nose’; cf. nāsus ‘nose’).

### 2.4.2 (iii) Derivational suffixes that eventually became inflectional

Several PIE derivational suffixes were integrated into the inflectional system in numerous daughter languages. By far the most important were the collective suffix *-h₂- (see 2.3.4 (i) ad fin.) and the feminine suffixes *-h₂-, which formed feminines in *-ah₂- from o-stems, and *´-ih₂- ~ *-yáh₂-, which formed feminines from athematic stems and induced proterokinetic inflection. Numerous examples of fem. *-ah₂- can be found among the adjectives of all the more archaic non-Anatolian languages; *-ih₂- ~ *-yáh₂- survives robustly in Greek, Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, and Germanic, always with some innovations. For examples, see 2.3.5. In Core IE, at the latest, there was an elative suffix * -yos- ~ *-is- deriving adjectives that meant something like ‘exceptionally X’, where X was the meaning of the basic adjective. This suffix apparently induced amphikinetic inflection; for

<!-- page: 81 -->

example, from *h₁wér-u-s ~ *h₁ur-éw- ‘broad’ (Skt urús, Gk εὐρύς, both with zero grade of the root generalized) was constructed *h₁wér-yos- ~ *h₁ur-is- ‘unusually broad’ (Skt várīyas- ‘broader’). Note that the suffix was added directly to the root; evidently it was part of the Caland system. In all the daughters in which this suffix survives it has become a comparative suffix. Superlatives were subsequently formed from it, in *-is-m̥ o- in Italic and Celtic, but in *-is-to- in the other daughters (cf. Skt váriṣṭʰas ‘broadest’).
