---
title: "Dictionary — M"
author: "Michiel de Vaan"
date: "2008"
source_type: mixed
extraction_date: 2026-05-07
source_file: "vaan-2008-latin-italic-dialects.pdf"
chunk: "Letter M"
---

# M


<!-- pdf-page: 370; printed-page-estimate: 356 -->

macer, -a, -urn 'thin, lean' [adj. ο/α} (PL+) Derivatives: macellus 'rather thin' (Lucil.+X macere 'to be thin' (PL), macescere 'to become thin, shrivel' (PL+), macies 'thinness' (Lucr.+), macilentus 'thin' (P1-+). macor 'thinness' (Pac), macritudo 'thinness' (PL);permacer 'very lean' (Cato+). Pit *makro- 'long, lean'. PIE *mh₂k-ro- 'long'. IE cognates: Olr. doformaig 'to add, increase5, MW magu,

<!-- pdf-page: 371; printed-page-estimate: 357 -->

MCo, maga, MBreL maezur, maguaff*to raise, feed' < PCI, *make/o- 'to nourish' (< *'to make long'?), OW MCo, MBreL map 'son' < *makuo-> Olr. mace < *makkuo-; Hit, maklant- 'thin, meagre' < *m(e)h₂lc-lo-nt-, Av. masah- 'size', Gr μακρός Mong', μήκος [n,] 'length', OHG magar, Olc, magr 'meagre'. Bibl.: WH II: 2, EM 375, IEW 699, Schxijver 1991: 167, Meiser 1998: 107, Schumacher 2004: 466-468, → mactus

maceru, -are 'to make wet, soak; to worry' [v, I] (Andr.+) Derivatives: maceria Vail of brick or stone* (PL+; also maceries Varro+), macerescere 'to become soaked' (Cato), Pit *makero- 'soaked/kneaded', PIE *meh₂g-? IE cognates: Gr, μάσσω, Att μάττω 'to knead' (for *μάζω on the basis of the aor. έμαξα) , aor.ps, μαγηναι, Gr, μάγμα [n.] 'kneaded mass, smear'; Arm, macanim 'to thicken, stick together'; OCS mazati 'to anoint', CS maih 'unction' [f ]; Mole, maka 'to smear', OHG mahhon^ OS makon 'to make'. The attested words presuppose an adj. *makero- 'soaked' or 'kneaded'. The verb macerare can be interpreted as 'to soaken, soften by soakening', and maceria as 'wall (of kneaded material, clay)'. This meaning would fit PIE *mh₂g- 'to knead' well, but Latin -k- does not correspond. Bibl.: WH II: 2-4, EM 375, IEW 698, Schrijver 1991: 142,384, LIV *mag-.

mactus 'honoured; smitten' [adj. o/a] (Cato+) j Derivatives: made [indech] 'honoured, blessed, bravo' (Cato+); mactare 'to afflict, honour, sacrifice, kill' (PL+), mactabilis 'able to kill' (Lucr.), mactatus, -lis 'sacrificial slaying' (Lucr); magmentum 'part of a sacrificial animal' (Varro+), magmentarium 'shrine for the reception of the magmentum' (Varro+). Pit *makio~ 'honoured, blessed', *mak-mn(-to)- 'offering, sacrifice'. PIE *mh₂k-(e/o-) 'to make long5. Driessen (px-) proposes a connection with PCI. *make/o- 'to raise, nourish' from 'to make long' (sees s.v. macer). Latin 'honoured' (e.g. made esto 'be honoured') could be understood as. 'made long, made bigger'. This seems slightly more attractive than a derivation from Tmag- as in magnus 'big', since one might expect Lachmann's lengthening to yield *mag-tos > *mactus. The noun magmentum could also have been derived from a verbal stem *mak(e/o)~ 'to honour'. Risch 1979 explains made esto from a contamination of mactus esto and *macte ferto\ the denominal verb mactare he understands as *'to pronounce the macfe-formula'. Szemerenyi 1989: 29f. regards made as the oldest form in the expression made uirtute esto which he translates as 'be (provided) with power (and) virility'. Made would be the abl.sg- of an i-stem *mactis < *magh-tis, while mactus would be the thematic variant *majJ*to-. This is far-fetched, if only because there is no evidence for the meaning 'power'. Bibl.: WH II: 4f., 10, EM 376, IEW 708f. -> macer

macula 'stain, spot' [f. a] (PL+) Derivatives: maculosus 'stained, spotted' (PL+).

<!-- pdf-page: 372; printed-page-estimate: 358 -->

Pit *smatlo-> PIE *smhrtlo- 'wiping5? IE cognates: Gr. σμάω 'to cleanse, wipe clean', σμήμα 'ointment' < *$meh₂-mn. * The connection with the Greek verb is possible if *smHtlo- would yield Latin *(s)matlo- > *makulo~. For the likelihood of the first step in this development, see Schnjver 1991: 171, Semantically, an etymology of 'stain' as 'smearing' is not compelling, but it is conceivable, LIV adopts Chantraine's suggestion that the Gr. forms with -a- are secondary, and the root may have been *smehr. Bibl.: WH Π: 5f, EM 376, IEW 966f, LIV ?*smehr.

madeo 'to be wet' [v. Π; pf madin\ (PL+) Derivatives: madidus 'sodden, soaked, drunk' (Naev.+), madulsa 'state of drunkenness' (Pl.+); madefacere 4to make wet, soak' (Cato+), madefactare 'to soak' (PL),permadefacere 'to soak thoroughly' (PL); commadere 'to become tender' (Cato). Pit. *madre-. PIE *mh₂d-ehr 'to be wet'. IE cognates: Skt. madati 'to rejoice, get intoxicated', OAv. mada- 'intoxication', YAv. maSaite 'gets intoxicated', MoP mast 'intoxicated'; Gr. μαδάω 'to be moist', μαδαρός 'watery'. The Plautine invention madulsa is said to have been formed invoke mulsus 'honeyed', f. mulsa (p5tio\ I agree with Schrijver that the connection of madr 'wet' with Olr. maidid* "breaks, bursts' is unconvincing. The Ilr. and Gr. words can be connected under the assumption that Ilr. mad- reflects PIE *meh₂d- (cf Lubotsky 1981) and Gr. and Latin mad- are the regular outcome of *mh;>d-. Bibl.: WH Π: 6-8, EM 377, IEW 694f., Schrijver 1991: 167, 171, LIV *mad-.

maereo 'to be sad, mourn' [v. II] (PL+) Derivatives: maeror 'grief (PL+), maestus 'sad, mournful' (PL+), maestiter 'sadly' (PL), maestitia 'sadness' (PL+), maesiitudd 'id.' (PL+), maestare 'to make sad' (Acc.+). Pit. *mais-. PIE *meh₂is-? It seems likely that *mais- 'sad, grief is connected with the adj. miser, but no acceptable PIE pedigree has been found. It is possible to reconstruct *mais- < *meh₂i-s- and miser < *mh₂i-s-ro- if one accepts Schrijver's hesitant conclusion (1991: 248) that pretonic *HI yields short i in Latin. Yet there is no evident candidate for a PIE root *mh₂(-i)-. In theory, it might be an ί-present to the root *mhr 'to beckon, give a sign', reconstructed by LIV for CS mangti 'to beckon', Gr. μηνύω, Dor. μάνύω 'to indicate, make known*, and for OCS namajati 'to nod, beckon', Lith. moti 'to beckon' (possibly also in PGm. *mojan- "to tire oneself, OHG muoari). Bibl.: WH II: 8f, EM 377. -> miser

magnus * great, big, large' [adj. o/a] (Lex XII, Andr.+) Derivatives: (1) magnitas 'si2e' (Ace), magnitudo 'size, extent' (Varro*), magnu/ificits 'splendid, proud' (PL+), magnificare 'to prize' (PL+), magnificentia 'boastfulness, majesty5 (Ter.+), magnanimus 'brave, generous' (PL+), magnidicus

<!-- pdf-page: 373; printed-page-estimate: 359 -->

'boastful' (PL); permagnus 'very large' (Ter.+); (2) magis 'more' (Lex ΧΠ+), demagis 'furthermore' (Lucil.+); maior [maiior PL], -oris 'greater, older' (Lex XII+), maiestas 'dignity, majesty' (Andr.+), maiusculus 'somewhat older' (Pl.+); maxu/imus 'greatest, biggest' (PL+), maximitas 'hugeness' (Lucr.); magister 'commander, teacher' (Pl.+), magistra 'female teacher' (PL+), magisterivm 'instruction, control' (Pl.+), magistratus, -us '(the office of a) magistrate* (PL+); (3) Maius [adj.] 'name of the fifth month, May' (Varrof). Pit *magno/a- 'great', *magjos-, -jo/e$-, -is 'greater', *magisamo- 'greatest'. It. cognates: Ven. magetlon 'offering* (?); maisteratorbos [dat.pl.] 'to the *magisterators* (cf Marinetti 2004: 395-399); O. mais 'more', U. mestru [nom.sg.f.J 'bigger' < *ma(g)is-tero-\ O. maimas 'biggest' < *maA-mo~. PIE *mg-no- 'great', *mg-i(V)s- 'greater3. IE cognates: Olr. maige 'large' < *magio-, magdae 'vast', mal 'prince' < *mag-Io-; Olr. moigid or mogaid, 'to add', MW moi 'to give birth to a foal' < *mog-; Hit mekk-, mekki-1 mehkai- 'much, many, numerous', CLuw. maia- 'much, many' (?) < nom.acc.sg.n. *megh₂-; Hit makkess-*1

'to become numerous', maknu-* 'to multiply' < *mgh₂-; Skt mahi- Marge', mahantr 'great', Av. maziiah- 'bigger, more', mazista- 'biggest', OAv. mazoi [dat.sg.], mazbts [ins.pl.], YAv. mazhnt- 'big', Gr. μέγας, Arm. mec, Alb. madh large', Go. mikils, OE micel, OIc, mikill 'large, great, many', ToB maka, ToA mak 'many'.

For maximus < *magisVmo-, see Cowgill 1970: 125. The reflex magnus < *mgno- is explained phonetically by Schrijver by his rule *RDC- > RaDC-. The zero-grade suffix -is of magis is quite archaic from a PIE point qif view; see also satis. It cannot reflect *magjes, pace Meiser 1998: 195; cf. Schrijver 2003: 61, 65. The noun maiestas retains the suffix variant *-jes-. Bibl.: WH II: 10-12, EM 377-379, IEW 708f, Lejeune 1974: 336, Schrijver 1991: 480, Sihler 1995: 359, Meiser 1998: 65, Untermann 2000: 442f., 475, Schumacher 2004: 469. -> ingens

maialis 'gelded boar' [m. i] (Titin.+)

The Roman etymology (in Varro etc.) which states that maialis was thus named because it was sacrificed to the deity maia would fit the morphology, but is suspect for obvious reasons: it may be a mere popular etymology. The alternative etymology as *masdi-ali- by Schrijver 1991 connects Olr. mat, mata 'pig', but the morphology remains unclear. Also, it is uncertain that *-sdi- would really yield Latin -/- (or [-»"-]). Bibl.: WH II: 13, EM 379, Schrijver 1991: 143.

maia 'cheeks, jaws' [f. a] (Pl.+; usually pi.) Derivatives: maxilla 'lower part of the face, jaws' (Cic.+). Pit. *smaksla-, PIE *smk-slo/h₂- 'beard, chin'. IE cognates: Olr. smech 'chin', Hit. zamakur, zamankur 'beard' < *smo!c-ur (with secondary nasalization, and z- for *?-); Hit. samankuruant- [adj.] 'bearded'; Skt. smasru- [n.] 'beard', Arm. mawrow-k' 'beard1, Alb. mjekre 'chin, beard' [f.], Lith. smakras, smakra 'chin', Latv. smakrs 'chin'< *smok-ro-.

<!-- pdf-page: 374; printed-page-estimate: 360 -->

Mala reflects *smaks(V)la9 whereas maxilla can be from *smakslela, or has the productive suffix -ilia. Pit. *smaksla- is explained from *smksla- by Schrijver 1991: 496, with anaptyctic a in front of three coatiguous consonants. The a cannot reflect *o with the unrounding of *mo- > ma-> since this unrounding only took place in open syllable or in front of rC Leumann 1977 adopts Thurneysen's alternative etymology as *mandrsla 'chewing parts' to mandere 'to chew\ To its advantage, one may adduce the fact that *-slo- is usually deverbal; to its disadvantage, that maxilla would have secondary -xilla on the example of ala - axilla (also a body part). Bibl.: WHII: 15, EM 379, IEW 968, Leumann 1977: 208, Schrijver 1991: 490,496.

malleus 'hammer, mallet' [m. ο] (Pl.+) Derivatives: malleolus 'fire-dart, mallet-shoot' (Sis.+), mallo 'kind of tumour on the knees (with animals)' (Chiron.H-); marculus 'small hammer' (Lucil.+). Pit. *molalo- 'hammer', *molklo- 'hammer'. PIE *molH-lo-, *molH-tlo- 'crushing instrument'. IE cognates: OCS mlatb, Ru. molot, Cz. mlat 'hammer' < *molH-to-. Malleus could be derived from the root for 'to grind'; for the semantics, cf Ru. molot 'hammer' to PIE *mlH-. Schrijver 1991 shows that malleus must be an independent formation of Latin: an adj. in -eus built to a form *malalo- < *mola-lo- (unrounding of *o after m-) < *molH-lo-. In foursyllabic *malaleos9 syncope yielded malleus, Schrijver also argues that marculus must be a diminutive of a noun in *-&CK He assumes a dissimilation l> r from *malakelo- > *malkelo- > *markelo-. The original form may have been *molH~ko-. Or, if the dim. was formed more recently, *malalo-kelo- > *mallokelo- > *malkelo-. Yet these explanations are all rather cumbersome. Seldeslachts-Swiggers 1995 propose PIE *molhrtlo- > *moltlo- > *molklo- > *morklo- > marculus. The dissimilation of the first */ to r would have to precede the unrounding **?o- > *ma-, and thus be rather early. Of course, *molklo- could have acquired ma- analogically from *malalo~ as above. In view of the parallel formation of *molhrtlo- in BSL, this explanation for marculus seems preferable. Bibl.: WH II: 16, 37, EM 380, IEW 716-719, Schrijver 1991: 455-457, LIV *melh₂-. -+molo

malus 'unpleasant, bad' [adj. o/a] (Duenos inscr., Andr.+) Derivatives: malignus 'mean, unkind' (PL+), malignitas 'meanness' (Pl.+), malitia 'wicked character, vice' (Pl.+), malefacere 'to do wrong, harm' (Pl.+), malevolus 'ill-disposed' (Pl.+), other cps. in male-. Pit. *malo-. It cognates: O. mallom, malom [acc.sg.], mallud, malud [abl.sg.] 'bad, evir < O. *maluo- or *malio-, or a borrowing from Latin. PIE *mol-o- 'bad'? IE cognates: Olr. mell 'destruction', Gr. μέλεος 'idle; unhappy', maybe βλασφημέω Ho slander'; Arm. mel 'sin', Lith. melas 'lie', Latv. maids 'mistake'. The etymology given here is proposed by EM. It is semantically fine, but since it concerns a collection of largely isolated words in different IE branches, it remains uncertain. Bibl.: WH II: 19f, EM 380, IEW 724, Schrijver 1991: 457, Untermann 2000: 445.

<!-- pdf-page: 375; printed-page-estimate: 361 -->

m&lus 'pole, mast' [m. o] (PL+) Pit *masdo~. PIE *mh₂sdo- 'pole, mast'? IE cognates: Mir maide 'stick' < *mazdio-; Olr. matan 'club, stick?'; OHG mast 'pole, mast', OE mcesL If cognate with the Gm. and Irish forms, malus must reflect *mados, with *c/ > L Schrijver 1991 regards a connection with mas, maris 'man' as attrative, in which case 'man' must be a metaphor for 'penis'. The original meaning would be 'pole, stick'. Although conceivable, I regard this as uncertain. If rejected, no morphological analysis of the Italo-Celtic-Germanic element *ma$d- remains. It may be a non-IE loanword from the technical vocabulary. Bibl: WHII: 19, EM 381, IEW 701f., Schrijver 1991: 167. -> mas

malva 'mallow-plant' [f. a] (Varro+) Probably a borrowing from a Mediterranean language, maybe Semitic: Hebn mallUah 'name of a plant'. See also the vacillation in the yocalism of Gr. μαλάχη (also attested as μαλόχη, μολόχα) 'mallow'. Bibl: WH II: 17f.,EM380.

mamma 'breast, udder; mother' [f. a\ (PL+; VarrcrH) Derivatives: mammia 'breast' (PL), mammeatus 'full-breasted* (PL), mammosus 'large-breasted' (Lab.+), mammula 'nipple' (Varro+), mamilla 'nipple, spout' (Varro+). Pit. *mam(m)a* s PIE *mama. IE cognates: Ir. W. mam 'mother' ; Skt mama- [m.] 'uncle', MoP mam, mama, mami 'mother'; Gr. μάμμα, Ion- Att. μάμμη 'mother', Arm. mam 'grandmother', Alb. meme, Lith. mama, moma, Latv. mama, Ru. mama, NHG Alemannic Mamme. Nursery word, reduplication of labial nasal plus a. Bibl.: WH II: 21, EM 381, IEW 694. → anus, mater, nonnus

mancus 'maimed, crippled (at the hand)' [adj. o/a] (Pl.+) Pit. *manko-lX:

If cognate with rhartus 'hand', mancus must contain the athematic stem *man- 'hand'. This etymology would imply a semantic shift *man-ko- 'handy' > 'handicapped, having a defect of the hand'. Bibl.: WH II: 23, EM 382, IEW 740f. → manus,peccd

mando, -ere 'to chew, bite' [v. Ill; pf. mandi, ppp. mansurn] (Andr.+) Derivatives: mando 'glutton' (Lucil.+); manducus 'masked figure with champing jaws' (Pl.+), manducare 'to chew, eat' (LuciL+), manduco 'glutton' (Pompon.+), commanducare 'to chew up' (LuciL+); masucius 'voracious' (Paul ex F,). Pit. *mand-n- 'to stir > chew'. PIE *mt-n(e)-h₂- [pr.] 'to stir, whirl'. IE cognates: Skt. manthanti [3pl.act.], aor. amanthis-, pr.ps. mathya- 'to whirl round, rub, rotate stick to produce fire, shake',

<!-- pdf-page: 376; printed-page-estimate: 362 -->

mathita- 'rubbed out", mantha- [m.] 'stirred drink', Oss. yzmcentyn / (ce)zmcentun 'to shake, stir around'-, Lith. m$stiy 3s. mencia Ho mix', OCS mgsti, Is. m$tg, Ru. mjasti (obs.) 'to trouble, disturb' < BS1. *ment-. t The adj. masiicius (vowel length unproven) can be interpreted as *mansucius> remade from mandrucus on the basis of the ppp. mansum and/or the frequentative mansare (Nonius), WH, IEW and LIV assume that mandd belongs to the root of Skt. math- 'to rob, snatch away', Toch. mant- 'to hurt, separate' < PIE *menth₂-. Meiser justifies the semantic difference by positing a shift from 'to tear away' → 'grab (loot)' —> 'shred' —* 'eat greedily' —» 'chew*, assuming that 'shred' can still be read in some of the older attestations in Latin. I do not share this view: even in a passage like Andr. 39 cum socios nostros mandisset impius Ciclops, mandisset simply means 'had eaten', literally 'had chewed'. We cannot go beyound 'to chew* for the synchronic state of affairs in Latin. It seems more likely that mandd belongs to the root *menth₂- 'to stir, whirl', with a phonetic development as inpando (see s.v.). Bibl.: WH II: 24, EM 382, IEW 732f, Schrijver 1991: 222, Meiser 1998: 213, 2003: 212f, LIV *menth₂-. -> mala

maneo 'to remain in the same place' [v. II; pf. mansi, ppp. mansum] (Andr,+) Derivatives: mantare 'to remain, wait' (Pl.+), ommentare 'to tarry' (Andn); permanere 'to remain, continue to be' (Ter.+), remanere 'to remain, be left' (Acc.+); mansio 'staying, lodging' (Ter.+). Pit *m(o)n-e-. PIE *mn-ehr 'to remain'. IE cognates: Skt. amaman [3s.ipf./aor.act] 'has waited', mamandhi [2s.ipv.act.] 'wait!', pari .. . mamanyat [3s.optact] 'if he would miss / neglect', YAv. upa.mqnaiia- 'to wait', OP manaya- 'to expect'; Gr. μένω 'to remain, stay', μίμνω 'id.', μονή 'staying, detention*, Arm. mnam 'stay, expect'. The ppp. mansus (whence mansT) is a secondary formation; the original form was *mantos, as visible from mantare. The meaning 'remain' shows that manere probably continues a PIE stative in *-ehr, but the morphology of the root is disputed. LIV assumes zero-grade *w«-, but Schrijver objects that we would expect an outcome *mene-. He proposes that mane- represents *mone- with unrounding of *o in open syllable after m\ the ograde would stem from the perfect *me-mon-. For this pf, however, there is no certain evidence in the IE languages. LIV furthermore objects that moneo 'to admonish' did not undergo unrounding, but Schrijver (1991: 472) obviates this drawback by assuming that o-vocalism was restored in moneo but not in mane-. Obviously, this is ad hoc, but so is a vocalization *mn-e- > mane-. Sihler assumes that the a in maneo is a replacement for *meneo on the model of habeo, iaceo, placed, etc., but I see no motive for this replacement: Latin also has teneo, mereo, sedeo with e-vocalism. There is one other conceivable solution, viz. that maneo does reflect *mn-e-, and that the regular vocalization of this sequence was *mone- in Pit., at a stage preceding the Latin unrounding of *mo- > *ma- in open syllables. In particular, initial m- could have played a rounding role in this process. Bibl.: WH II: 26, EM 383, IEW 729, Schrijver 1991: 457f, Sihler 1995: 98, Meiser 2003: 139, LIV 2.*men-,

<!-- pdf-page: 377; printed-page-estimate: 363 -->

manS, -Sre 'to flow, pour, run, spread' [v. I] (Enn.+) Derivatives: permanare 'to flow through, diffuse' (PL+), permanascere 'to seep through' (PI.), remanare 'to flow back' (Enn.+), summanare 'to flow underneath' (PL+); manabilis 'seeping' (Lucr.), manalis 'of a spring, of rain' (Varro+). Pit *mano-l PIE *meh₂-no-? IE cognates: Olr. main (for *main, cf. gen.sg. manor, see Schrijver), W. mown 'peat-bogg, moss', Bret man 'moss' < *mam-, Denominal to a noun *mano/a-f? Latin *mano- and Celtic *mani- could go back to a PIE root *meh₂-, but no good candidate is available. This connection thus remains isolated. Bibl.: WHII: 30f, EM 384, IEW 699f., Schrijver 1991: 143.

manus, -us 'hand' [f. u] (Lex XII, Andr.+) Derivatives: manicae [f.pi.] * handcuffs, sleeve' (PL+), manicula 'small hand' (PL+), manualis 'held in the hand' (Sis.+), manuari 'to steal' (Lab. apud GelL), manuarius 'thief (Lab. apud GelL), manuleus *a long sleeve' (PL+), manuleatus * having long sleeves' (PL+), manulearius 'maker of sleeved garments' (PL); comminus 'at close quarters, close at hand' (Enn.+), eminus 'at long range' (Sis.+); mandare 'to hand over, commit, command' (Pl.+), commendare 'to entrust, recommend' (Pl.+), praemandare 'to recommend beforehand' (PL+); manceps, -cipis 'contractor, agent' (Pl.+), mancu/ipium 'confiscation^ ownership, slave' (Lex ΧΠ+), mancu/ipare 'to transfer, sell' (PL+), emancipare 'to release, make subservient' (PL+); manu/ip(u)lus 'handful, bundle, unit' (Pl.+), mamt/ip(u)laris [m.] 'common soldier', manip(u)latim 'in companies' (PL+); malluviae [f.pL] 'water in which the hands have been washed' (Fest, Paul, ex F.); mantelum 'hand-towel, napkin' (LuciL+), mantelium (Varro+) 'hand-towel, napkin'; manubiae [f.pL] 'prize-money, gain' (Naev.+), manubiarius 'concerned with booty' (PL); manubrium 'handle, haft' (PL+); manupretium 'payment for workmanship' (PL+), martu/ifestus 'caught in the act, evident' (Lex XII+), manifestarius 'caught in the act' (PL+); mamimittere 'to free' (Varro+). Pit *man-u- 'hand'. It. cognates: O. manim [acc.sg.] 'hand', U. manuve [loc.sg. + -en] , mani, mam*[ubl.sg.]9 manff [acc.pl.], SPic. manus [abl.pL] 'hand7 < *manu-\ O. manafum [ls.pf.?] 'to give', aamanaffed, aamanafed, amanafed [3s.pf.] 'to commission', emanafed [3s.pf.] 'id.' < *man-fe-f- 4to put at hands' (+ prev. a-, e-) < *-cte-cthr; U. mantrahklu, mantraklu, mandraclo [acc.sg.] '?'. PIE *mon-u- 'hand'. IE cognates: Olr. muin 'protection, patronage', Hit. maniiahh-1

'to distribute, entrust' < *mn-ieh₂-, OHG muni, OIc. mund 'hand', OIc. mundr 'the sum which the bridegroom has to pay for his bride' < *mn-to-. All Latin forms contain the stem *manu- 'hand'. Schrijver argues that mancus 'maimed' proves a stem *man-, but this is uncertain. The nouns manicae and *manulus (in manuleus) are regular derivations, and in comminus and eminus, we have *-manus* The verb mandare corresponds with Oscan *manfef- from *manu- + *{<fe-)dthr 'to put' = 'to put at hand, commit'. Manceps belongs to capio 'take', and manip(u)lus might be from *manu-plo- < *-plhro- 'a hand-ful' (see pled). For malluviae, see lavo, for manubiae etc. see habeo. Lat mantelum probably reflects

<!-- pdf-page: 378; printed-page-estimate: 364 -->

*man-tergslo-. It is disputed whether the Pit. stem was *man- or *mamt-. The only form which seems to be impossible from *manu- is the IL acc.pl. manf, which Schrijver argues to be a consonant stem: *man-ps > *man-Vns > *manVf> manf. Weiss (1993: 46) explains it as analogical toped-, with which it cooccurred in the set phrase manibus pedibusque 'with all one's strength'. Schrijver compares Olr. muin 'protection' < *moni- and Hit. maniiahh- 4to hand over', and reconstructs *mon- for Latin, with *mo- > ma- in open syllable. This seems possible, although the semantic connection with Irish is not very compelling. The closest semantic and formal match is with OIc. mund, OE mund, OHG muni 'hand* < *mn-to-* The morphology is strange: is Pit, *monu- an original adjective? Bibl.: WH II: 23-25, 29, 32, 34f., EM 381-386, IEW 740f., Schrijver 1991: 458, Untermann 2000: 448-451. → suesco, tergeo

manus 'good' [adj\ o/a] (Carmen Saliare+; maybe Duenos inscr. acc.sg, manom). Variant: manis. Derivatives: mam (PL, Lucil.), mane (Pl.H-) 'early in the day, morning', Manes, -ium [m.pL] 'the spirits of the dead' (Lucr.+), Mania 'the mother of the Lares; (pi) bogies' (Varro+); immanis 'savage, brutal (PL+), enormous (Varro+)'. Pit *mano-. PIE *meh₂-no- 'good'. IE cognates: Olr. maith, W. mad, Bret, mat 'good' < *mhrti-. A Latino-Celtic correspondence with regular ablaut, but the root etymology is uncertain. LIV has a root *meh₂- 'to give a sign, wink\ which might have developed into 4be favourable'. But this is very speculative. Bibl.: WH II: 25-28, EM 383f., IEW 693, Schrijver 1991: 143. → maturus

marceo 'to be withered, droop' [v. II] (Lucr.+) Derivatives: marcescere 'to wither' (Varro+); permarcere 'to be very weak' (Enn.+); murcidus 'lazy' (Pompon,), muricidus *faint-hearted' (Pl.+). Pit. *mark-e- [v.], *morko- [adj.]. PIE *mrk-ehr 4to be soaked, be weak', *mork-o- 'weak'. IE cognates: Hit. markiie/a-zl 'to disapprove of> refuse' < *mrk-ie/o-'9 Skt, pn pra-mrcyatU caus. marcayati, aor. mfksfsta 'to damage, hurt', mrkta- 'hurt', marka- [mj 'destruction, death', mfc- 'the injuring, irijure', OAv. maranc- / rnvrsng- [pn], marvxsaite [3s.aor.sb.med.] 'to destroy', markka- 'ruin', YAv. mahrka- [m.] 'death', ahu-rr&rvxs [nom.sg.] 'destroying life', Oss. marg 'poison*; Lith, mirkti 'to become weak, soaked', merkti 'to soak', Ukr. morokva (dial.) 'quagmire, swamp', MHG meren 'to dip bread into water or wine' < ^merjen < *rnerk~. Maybe here MIr. bren, W, braen, Bret, brew 'rotten, fouF < *mrekrjo-, *mrakn(i)o-; but these may also contain *£> r-, and belong to OHG braccho 'hound', LaL fragro. If marceo belongs here it must reflect PIE *mork- with unrounding of *mo- > *ma-, or PIE *mr£- with vocalization to *mark- in front of another consonant, or as a secondary full grade (thus Rix 1996: 61). Since murcidus and muricidus (maybe a corruption of murcidus) are semantically very close to marceo (see Meiser 1998: 84), and since they probably reflect *mork-, it is preferable to assume *mrk- for the verb.

<!-- pdf-page: 379; printed-page-estimate: 365 -->

Bibl.: WHII: 36f., EM 386f, IEW 739f, Schrijver 1991:458f, 1995: 17If.

mare 'sea; sea-water* [n. i] (Andr.+) Derivatives: marinw 'of the sea' (PL+), semimarmus 'half belonging to the sea' (Lucr.), transmarmus 'of overseas' (Varro+), maritimus Of the sea, nautical' (PL+), mariscus 'rush' (Plin.+), marisca 'large and inferior kind of fig' (Cato+). Pit *mari- 'sea, lake', *marisko- [adj.]. PIE *mor-i- [n.] 'sea, lake'. IE cognates: Olr. muir [mj, W. mor 'sea' < *mori, Oss. mal 'stagnant water', OPr. mary, Lith. mares < *moria7 OCS morjey Ru. more [n.], morja [nom.pL] < *morio-> Go. mari-saihws, OIc. marr 'sea', OHG mari, men 'sea, lake'. Mare has resulted from unrounding of *mo- in open syllable. The adj. mariscus is considerd to be obscure, but may well be a derivative of mare. Note that *mor-i- referred to any large body of water, e.g. a lake. Lat. mari-timus may have been modelled cmfini-timtts and ex-timus. If the isolated Ossetic form is a loanword from Gothic, the etymon *mori is restricted to the European languages. Bibl.: WH II: 38-40, EM 387, IEW 748, Schrijver 1991:459.

margO, -inis 'retaining wall, border, margin' [m. n] (Varro+) Pit. *marg-en-. PIE *mrg-n- 'border'. IE cpgnates: Olr. rnruig 'territory, area', W. bro 'country, land', GauL PN Brogi-marok,\ethnonym Allobroges 'Foreigners' < PCI. *mrog-i-; Hit. mark- / mark- 'to divide, separate' < *m(o)rg-;'MoP man 'region' < *morg~; Go, marka 'area, border'. The different vocalization in Celtic is unexplained. Schrijver explains margo and marceo from a change */wo- > *wa- in front of r + velar, but see s.v. marceo. Since margo continues an κ-stem, we may also explain mar- as the regular vocalization of a zero grade in *mrg-n-. Bibl.: WH II: 39f, EM 387, IEW 738, Schrijver 1991: 459.

mantus 'married, marital; husband' [adj.; m.] (Pl.+) Derivatives: Jmaritare 'to mate, provide with a husband or wife' (Varro+), commarxius 'fellow husband' (PI.). Pit *mareito-l *marito- 'having a young woman'. PIE *mor-(e)i- or *mor-ih₂- 'y°ung woman'. IE cognates: W. morwyn, OCo. moroin 'girl, maiden1 < PCL *moreina-, MW merch 4daughter' < ^mer-k^ Skt. marya- 'young man', YAv. mairiia- [m.] 'scoundrel, villain', Bac. μαρηγο 'servant', Gr. μεϊραξ [m./f.] 'girl, boy' < *wer-/o-; OPr. mergo, -u, -a 'maiden'> Lith. marti 'girl, bride (without children)' < *mor-t-iH-, Lith. merga 'girl' < *mergh-h₂-* Derivation with possessive *-fo- from a stem *morei-l*rnon- > *man- 'young woman'; Latin shows unrounding of */wo- to *ma- in open syllable. The o-grade can be reconstructed for Latin based on the fact that Celtic and Lith. also have *mor-. No zero grade is attested for the root of this stem. Bibl.: WH Π: 40f, EM 387, IEW 738f., Thieme 1963: 238-241, Leumann 1977: 334, Schrijver 1991: 4591,1995: 248,

<!-- pdf-page: 380; printed-page-estimate: 366 -->

M3rs 'the god Mars; martial prowess, warfare' [m. /] (VOLat+; Lapis Satricanus mamarlei [datsg.], CIL 49 (Tusculum) maurie [datsg.]) Derivatives: Marspiter 'Father Mais' [qnly nom.] (Varro+), Mavors, -tis 'the god Mars, warfare' (Pl>); Marmar, Marmor 'Mars' (Carmen Arvale); Martius 4 of Mars, of March, martial' (CIL 1.1513, Varro+); Mdmers, -tis 'the Oscan form of Mars9

(Varro+). It. cognates: O. μαμερτει, mam(e)rt(ei) [datsgJ 'Mars', μαμερτινο [nom.sg.f.], μαμερτινουμ [gen.pl.m.] 'of Mars' (suffix *-wo-), μαμερτιοι [dat.sg.m.], mamerttials, mamertiais [abl.pLf.] 'of Mars' (*-io-); U. marte, marti, marti [datsg.] 'Mars', marties, martier [gen.sg.m.], marti, martie [datsg.m,], mariie [voc.sg.m.], Mars, martses [abl.pLf.] 4of Mars' (*-/o-). The forms Marmor and Marmor of the Carmen Arvale cannot be trusted, and are better left out of consideration. WH assume Mavors to be the oldest form, but the Lapis Satricanus now shows that mamart- is older. The extant forms show a development within Latin from *mamart-, which agrees with (λ mamert-, via *mauo/ert- (Mavort-, maurte) to Mart-. The latter change would be regular if interpreted as *mawarts > Mars (loss of *w between two identical vowels); datsg. maurie must be from a different dialect, or maybe shows the development in threesyllabic forms of the paradigm. The ο in Mavors must then be secondary. Yet the preceding change of intervocalic *w > *>v is unique; it could be interpreted as a dissimilation to the first m-, but it is still completely isolated. Hence, one might consider a foreign origin of the name *mamart-, possibly with a sound in the second syllable which was neither m nor v, written with m in VOLat and in Oscan. Bibl.: WH II: 41-45, EM 388, Leumann 1977: 121, Meiser 1998: 127, Untermann 2000: 446-448,452£

mas, maris 'male, masculine; a male' [adj.; m. /] (Pl.+; gen.pl marium Cic.) Derivatives: masculus [adj.] 'male' (Varro+), masculus [m.] 'a male' (PL+), masculmus Of the male sex' (Varro+); semimas 'half-male' (Varro+). Pit *mas- / *mas-. PIE *meh₂-(6)s / *mh₂-es, *mh₂-es-m, *mh₂-s-os? The ablaut mas vs. maris is explained by Schrijver from an ablauting paradigm *meh₂-(o)s, *mh₂-(e)s-, Adams 1985b: 246 has suggested that mas- in masturbor 'to masturbate' contains the same word, the original meaning having been 'penis'. This would have been used metaphorically for 'male, man'. According to Adams, malm 'pole' could belong here too. Watkins 1995: 535f. and Katz 1998a: 21 If. have suggested that masturbor contains a PIE element *mos(t)- 'marrow'; but it seems preferable to restrict the development *wo- > ma- to open syllables (cf. Schrijver 1991: 474 and the discussions of marced and margo above). Bibl.: WH II: 46f, EM 388, Schrijver 1991: 167f. → malus

mateola 'wooden hammer' [f. a] (Cato) Pit *mateja-. PIE *mot-(i-?) 'club, hoe'. IE cognates: Skt matya- 'club, harrow, roller', mati-kar

<!-- pdf-page: 381; printed-page-estimate: 367 -->

4to harrow, level the earth', OCS motyka3 Ru. motyga 'hoe\ OHG medela 'plough'. Diminutive of a noun *matea 'hoe' vel sim., which could be from pre-Italic *mo/-. This noun might be derived from PIE *me/- 'to measure' > 'throw / reap', which is attested in the verb meto. Since *mot- denotes an instrument to work the land in all languages, this would imply that the verb already had this connotation in PIE. Bibl.: WHII: 49, EM 389, IEW 700, Schrijver 1991: 460. → meto

mater» matris 'mother' [f. r] (Andr.+) Derivatives: maternus 'maternal, motherly' (Enn.+), matercula 'little mother' (Pl.+), matrona 'married woman, wife' (Pl.+), matronaiis 'of a married woman' (Lab.+), matrimdnium 'marriage' (Pl.+), matralia, -drum [n,pL] 'the festival of Mater Matuta' (Varro+), matrescere 'to become like one's mother' (Pac), matrix 'female animal kept for breeding' (Varro+), matertera 'mother's sister' (Pl.+); materia / materies [f.] 'material, substance, wood' (PL+), materiarius [m.] 'timber-merchant' (Pl.+), materinus 'rough, unused' (Cato). Pit *mater, *matr-. It. cognates: FaL mate [nom.sg.], O. maatreis, U. matres, matrer [gen.sg.], SPic. matereih [datsg.?] 'mother1. PIE *meh₂-tr- 'mother'. IE cognates: Skt matar-, Av. matar-, MoP madar, Gr. μήτηρ, Arm. mayr 'mother', Alb. meter 'sister', Lith. mote^ OCS mati, OHG muoter, Olr. maithir, ToB macer, To A piacar 'mother'. * The noun matertera contains the comparative suffix *-tero-: 'who is like a mother', 'the aunt on mother's side'. The PIE root etymology is uncertain. 'Mother' might be a derivative in *-/er- to the nursery form *ma(ma) 'mum1 (cf Dor. μα 'mother'), but phonologically it was apparently realized as *meh₂-, yielding a long vowel. Bibl.: WH II: 49-52, EM 389f, IEW 700f, Giacomelli 1963: 251, Schrijver 1991: 384, Beekes 1995: 188, Untermann 2000:441.

maturus 'ripe, full-grown' [adj. ο/α] (Pl.+) Derivatives: matwrare 'to make haste, speed, ripen', maturescere 'to mature, ripen' (Varro+); immaturus 'unripe, not mature' (PL+), praematurus 'very early, prompt'; Matuta 'the goddess of Dawn' (Lucr.+), matUtinus 'of early morning' (Acc.+). Pit. *matu- 'ripeness'. It. cognates: maybe O. maatuis [dat.pL] name of a god. PIE *meh₂-tu- 'ripeness'. / Both *maturo- 'ripe' and *matuto- 'of early morning' presuppose a noun *matu- 'ripeness, early moment'. The root is probably the same as in manus 'good'. Long -w- can be analogical after the adj. of the type acutus, from a full-grade suffix *-te/ou- (kss likely), or from an ins.sg. *meh₂-tuhi 'with ripeness' (whence *meh₂-tuhrt-^ and thematization). Bibl.: WH II: 53f, EM 391, IEW 693, Leumann 1977: 316, Untermann 2000: 442. → manus

me 'me' [pron. pers. Is. oblique] (VOLat.+): accabl. med, me (med Duenos inscr., Garigliano Bowl, Tiburbase, PI., Enn.), dat miheU miht9 ml, gen.sg. mel Derivatives: poss. adj. meus 'my' (VOLat.+: Garigliano Bowl meois [abl.pl.rn.]).

<!-- pdf-page: 382; printed-page-estimate: 368 -->

Pit ace. *me (stressed), *me (unstressed), dat. *τηεχβΐ9 abl. *med, gen. *me/oi; poss. *mejo~. It. cognates: Ven. mego, mego, meu [ace.]; FaL med, met [ace], [me]d [?abl.]; PalU. miom [acc.sg.], U. mehe [datsg.] Ί , me' < ace. *me-om, dat. *me-hei. PIE ace. *h₁me,*hime, dat. *h₁meghio, abl. *himed, gen.loc. *himoi 'me'; *h₁mo- [adj.] 'my'. IE cognates: Skt. mam [ace], maya [ins.], makyam [dat], mat [abl], mama [gen.], mayi [loc], ma [ace], me [gen.dat.encl.]; Gr. έμέ [ace], με [acc.encl.], μοι [dat.]; OCS m$ •me1; Go. mik 'me', NHG mich [ace], Go. meina [gen.], miy [dat].

The -d in the abl. can be inherited from PIE. In the ace, it can be the abL form which was used as the ace The long vowel will stem from the stressed acesg. *me > *me. The dat.sg. goes back to *me%ei as shown by Umbrian mehe. The gen.sg, met is really the gen. of the poss. meus 'my* < *meio-, a thematization of *me/, which may be a remake of PIE ^ m o i [gen. loc.]. Bibl.: WH II: 84f., EM 391, IEW 703, Giacomelli 1963: 251, Lejeune 1974: 336, Leumann 1977: 46If, Schrijver 1991: 17, Beekes 1995: 207f, Sihler 1995: 371-379, Meiser 1998: 156-158, Untermann 2000: 479f, Marinetti 1999: 426, Wallace 2005 — ego

medeor 'to heal, cure' [v. II] (Cato+) Derivatives: medicus 'doctor' (Pl.+), medicare 'to cure, heaP, medicari 'to cure' (Pl.+), medicina 'surgery, remedy, healing' (Pl.+), mediclnus 'of healing' (Varro*), medicamentum 'medicament, drug' (PL+); remedium 'remedy' (Cato+). Pit *medr-e-. PIE *med- 'to measure*. IE cognates: Olr. midithir 'to measure, judge', MW medu *to think, possess, distribute', MCo. medhes 'to say* < PCI. *mede/o-> Olr. mess judgement' < *medrtu-, air-med. 'measure'; YAv. vi-maSaiianta 'they must measure', νϊ-madr 'healer, physician'; Gr. μέδω 'to rule*, μέδομαι 'to care for, think of, μήδομαι 'to consider'; Go. mitan, miton *to measure, consider', OE metan, NHG messen.

The meaning αϊ. medeor is based on a semantic shift from 'measure' to 'distribute a cure, heal'. For a PIE stative verb (as assumed by LIV) or a frequentative, the e-giade in med- would be surprising. If the intermediate phase was 'to judge' (cf. meditor), medeor and its e-grade may have been grafted on the noun *medo(s)~ 'judgement, law' (> modus) seen in U. mefs, mers 'law'. We can then regard it as a stative verb *medre- 'to be a judge' > 'to be a healer, to heal' which was formed within Italic. Bibl.: WH II: 54f., EM 392, IEW 705f, Schumacher 2004: 478ff., LIV l.*med-. → meditor, modus

meditor, -firi *to think about constantly, contemplate, exercise1 [v. I] (Pl.+) Derivatives: permeditatus 'well rehearsed' (Pl.+).

Probably derived from the ppp. *meditos belonging to medeor 'to be a judge, give a judgement' (see s.v. medeor). Hence, *medAtajefo- meant 'to judge constantly, contemplate'. Bibl.: WH II: 55f, EM 392f., IEW 705f, Leumann 1977: 548, LIV l.*med-. ^ medeor, modus

<!-- pdf-page: 383; printed-page-estimate: 369 -->

medius 'central, middle' [adj. o/d] (Andr.+) Derivatives: mediast(r)inus 'servant employed on general duties' (Cato+); dfmidius 'half, divided medially' (Pl.+), dimidiatus 'halved' (Pl.+); medioxu/imus 'middle' (Pl.+); mendies 'midday, noon' (Pl.+), meridianus 'of midday, southern' (Varro*). Pit *mepio-. It cognates: O. mefiai [loc.sg.f.], mefi[u [nom.sg.f], SPic. mefiin [loc.sg. + -en] 'middle'; maybe SPic. mefistrui [datsg.m/n.]'?' if from *mef-istero-, PIE *medhi-o- 'middle'. IE cognates: Gaul. Medio-lanum, -matrici, Olr. midr (*medhu-) 'mid-1, Mir. mide 'middle', Olr. i-mmedon 'in medio1, Skt. madhya-, OAv. maidiia-, YAv. maiSiia- 'middle', Gr. μέσος, μέσσος [adj.] 'middle', OIc. midr, OHG mini [adj.] 'located in the middle'. Lat. dimidivs < *dis-medius. Wachter 2004: 377 explains medioxumus as *medio- + *ksomo- 'earth' < *dhghomo-, but there is no evidence that PIE *d*g* could yield ks in Latin (texd is not a good example, see s.v.). The adj. is more easily understood as a derivative in ^xumus to mediocris, or to in medio (thus Leumann). Since *-cti occurs as a recognizable suffix in some adverbs of place (Skt. adhi 'on', Gr. -ύι), it might be hidden in medius. A meaning 'middle' for *me can be supported by Gr. μέτα 'with', Go. mip < *me-t-. Bibl.: WH II: 57f, EM 393, IEW 706f, Leumann 1977: 498, Schrijver 1991: 133, Beekes 1995: 220, Sihler 1995: 441, Meiser 1998: 91, Untermann 2000: 464f

♦> medulla 'marrow, pith, interior'^[f. a] (Pl.+) *;

Derivatives: medullitus [adv.] 'inwardly, from the marrow' (Pl,+). Pit *(s)meru-lo-l ' ' PIE *smer-u- 'marrow'. IE cognates: Olr. smiur (u), W. mery Bret, mel 'marrow' < PCI. *smeru-, OIc. smjgr [n.], OE smeoroy OHG smero 'fat' < *smerua~. Semantically, the connection with *smer-u- is the most attractive one, but it requires a change r > d> which is the opposite of what one might expect. It could be interpreted as a hypercorrection in view of *d > r in mendies (where it is a dissimilation) and arbiter, arfuisse (where it is often interpreted as a dialecticism). Also, u in -ulla does not necessarily «reflect *-w-. Still, the meaning is the same, so we may accept this explanation for the time being. Bibl.: WH II: 58f, EM 393f., IEW 970f

meio, -ere 'to urinate' [v. Ill; pf. mi(n)xi, ppp. mi(n)ctum\ (C. Titius orat+) Derivatives: permeiere 'to urinate all over' (Lucil.+); circummingere 'to piss round' (Petr.). Pit. *meix(j)e-> *(-)ming-e/o-. PIE pr. *h₃meigh-(i)e-, pr. *h₃mi-n-gh- 'to urinate'. IE cognates: Skt. ova mehanti [3p,act.] 'they piss', amiham [ls.aor.], mehayati [caus.], mihe [inf.], Av. moeza-, Gr. όμείχω, Lith. myzti, Latv. mizt, SCr. mizaii 'to urinate', Sin. m(d)zeti 'to flow, trickle, drip', OE migan 'to urinate'. WH regards -mingere as a secondary present form, based on the pf mTnxi; others, e.g. LIV, regard mingo as old. Bibl.: WH II: 60f„ EM 394, IEW 713, Schrijver 1991: 24, LIV *h₃meigh-.

<!-- pdf-page: 384; printed-page-estimate: 370 -->

mel, mellis 'honey' [n. /] (Pl.+) Derivatives: melculurn 'sweetheart' (Pi,), mella 'hydromel' (Pl.+), mellarius [m.] 'bee-keeper' (Varro+), mellarium 'apiary' (Varro), mettitus 'honey-sweet' (Varro*), mellma 'sweetness' (PL)\ mellilla 'sweetheart' (PL); mulsus 'mixed with honey' (Pl.+), mulsum 'drink made from honey and wine' (PL+). Pit. *melL PIE *mel-i(-t) [nom.acc.] 'honey'. IE cognates: Olr. mil, W. Co, Bret, mel 'honey'; Hit. militt- I malitt- [n.], CLuw. mallit- 'honey', Pal. malitanna- 'having honey', HLuw. malidima/i- 'honey-sweet' < *melit, *ml-it-os, Gr. μέλι, -τος [η.] 'honey', μέλισσα, Att. -ττα 'bee'; Arm. meir, gen.sg. melow 'honey', melow, gen.sg. metowi 'bee'; Alb. mjal, mjalte 'honey' < *mel(i)tom; Go. milip [n.] 'honey', OE meledeaw 'nectar', OS mili-dou 'mildew', OE mi Use 'honey-sweet'. The origin oft mel, mellis is disputed. Leumann 1977: 213 regards mell· as secondary on the model ofJel9fellis 'bile'. Sihler posits a paradigm nom. *melid> gen.*melites > *meld, *melites » *meld, *meldes > *mell, melles. It is uncertain whether *i in *melid. would be syncopated, but one may salvage Sihler's solution by assuming that *melles regularly developed in the gen.sg., and *mell was then introduced into the nom.acc.sg. Meiser reconstructs an π-stem *mel-n- in order to arrive at mell·; since there is no supporting evidence for an w-suffix, this would imply that Latin secondarily made a new oblique stem *mel-n- to the nom.acc. *mel < *melL Latin mulsus probably has -sus for *-tus on the model of solsus 'salted', but it may also be original ^mfojl-t/d-to- 'provided with honey'. Bibl.: WH II: 61f., 123, EM 394, IEW 723f., Sihler 1995: 230, Meiser 1998: 114.

melior, -oris 'better' [adj. r] (Naev.+; acc.sg. meliosem (Varro); n. melius) Derivatives: melius [adv.] 'better' (Pl.+), meliusculus 'somewhat better' (PL+). PIE *mel-ios, -ios-. IE cognates: Gr. μάλα 'very, quite', μάλλον 'more, rather' (for * μέλλον?), μάλιστα 'mostly, quite especially'. The PIE etymology is weak, since Gr. μάλα shows no trace of an e-grade, and the root is not attested in other derivatives. Words for 'good' can have many origins, and are frequently renewed. Alternatively, one might connect μέλω 'be anxious, care for', Hit. mal 'mind', CLuw. mal· 'thought, idea' < *mo/- (Kloekhorst 2008: 545f.). Bibl.: WH II: 63, EM 394f, IEW 720 ~> mulier, multus

membrum 'body part, limb, member' [n. o] (Lex XII+) Derivatives: membratim 'limb by limb' (Varrcrf), membrana 'membrane, skin' (Varro*). Pit *memsro-, PIE *mems-ro- 'body-part, meaty part'. IE cognates: Olr. mir 'portion' [n.j < *mems-ro-; Skt. mamsa- 'meat', mams-pacam- [adj.f.] 'used for cooking meat', mas [acc.sg.n.] 'meat'; Gr. μήρα [ph] 'body-parts', μηρός [n.] 'thigh' < *mes-ro-; Arm. mis, Alb. rnish, OPr, mensa, mensoy Lith. mesa, mensa Zem., Latv. miesa, OCS m$so9 Ru. mjaso 'meat' < *mems-om; CS mgzdra 'inner side of a rind', Ru. mezdra 'inner side (of hide)', OPo, miqzdra, mi^zdra 'membrane' < *mems-ro-; Go. mimz 'meat',

<!-- pdf-page: 385; printed-page-estimate: 371 -->

ToB mlsa [pi.] cmeat\ Most IE forms for 'meat5 can go back to a n. *memso-, but Skt shows traces of an athematic form *mes- without internal nasal. It is unclear how -m- entered this root: was the original form a reduplicated ^me-ms-Ί Slavic, Irish and Latin continue *mems-ro- with the derived meaning 'body part, membrane'. According to Vine 2002: 333, the original PIE form may have been a collective *mems-reh₂, from which *memsrom was back-formed Whether Gr. μήρα also continues this noun seems to be disputed; as for the meaning, it would perfectly fit If PIE had *mes- in alternation with *rnems-9 Greek may have used *mes- as the basis to derive *mes-ro- 'body part'. Bibl.: WH II: 64f, EM 395, IEW 725, Schrijver 1995: 452, Meiser 1998: 119. -> mensa

memim 'to remember" [v, pf.] (Naev.+; ipv. memento) Derivatives: commeminisse 'to remember' (Pl+), commimsci [pf. commentus sum] 'to think up, invent, feign' (PL+), recommimscf 'to recollect' (PL·), remimscl 'id.' (Ter.+), commentum 'scheme, device5 (PL+), commentan 'to think about, prepare' (Pl.+), commentarius/m 'notebook, record' (Varro+), recommentarl 'to recollect' (PI); memor> -oris 'mindful' (Pl.+), memorare 'to say, telP (PL+), memoratus, -us 'account' (PL+), memorabilis 'remarkable' (PL+), commemorare 'to recall' (PL+), commemorabilis 'remarkable' (PL+), commemoramentum 'reminder' (Caecil.+), commemoratio 'id.' (Ter.+), immempr 'forgetful' (P1-+), immemorabilis 'not fit to be repeated; unable to recollect' (Pl.+); memoria 'memcfry, remembrance' (PL+), memoriter 'accurately' (Pl>), Lat. mimsci, and mentus (Paul, ex F.) are not trustworthy. Pit pf. *me-mon-, *me-mn-, ppa. *me-mn~os-9 ppp. *mn-to-, pr. *men-i(e)-;. It cognates: maybe Ven. metlon Offering' if from *men-tlo-; maybe O. memnim [acc.sg.] '?' < *me-m(e)n-i(H)o~. PIE pf. *me-mon-, *me-mn-, pr. *men-i- or *tfw-ie-, ppp. *mn~to-. IE cognates: Olr. muinithir* 'to intend', do-muinethar* 'to think, believe' < PCL *manie/o-; Skt. manyate [pr.] 'to; think, believe, consider', amata [3s.aor.med.], -mamnate [3d.pf.med.]s mata-^ 'thought, regarded as'; Av. mainiia- 'to invent, think*; Gr. μαίνομαι 'to rage', pf, μέμονα, pL μεμαμεν 'to intend to', Gr, -ματος 'thought'; Lith. minti 'to recall', mineti, 3s. mini 'to mention', OCS mbneti 4to think', Is. mbnjg, 3s. mbnit < *mn-ehr; Go. man Ί think, I believe'.

The pf. ipv* reflects *me-mn-tod. The inchoative -mintsci suggests an earlier present formation *men-i- or */wK-/e-, which is confirmed by other IE languages (cf. Schrijver 2003 for the /-present). The noun commentum can be interpreted as a substantivized ppp. The older etymologies (WH, EM) derive memor from the root *(s)mer- 'to remind'. More recent works (from Leumann 1977: 610 on) agree on a derivation *me-mn-os- > *memnor- » *memor-. This is more attractive from the point of view of PIE morphology: for *(s)mer-, the only certain reduplicated formation is a pr. *(s)mi~(s)mer-9 which would not yield memor. The price we must pay is an ad hoc dissimilation or analogical change from *memnor to memor. Meiser 2003: 47, however, returns to the root *(s)mer-, but does not explain the derivation.

<!-- pdf-page: 386; printed-page-estimate: 372 -->

Bibl.: WH II: 65-67, EM 395-397, IEW 726-728, 969f, Lejeune 1974: 336, Schrijver 1991: 468, Sihler 1995: 619, Meiser 1998: 215, Untermann 2000: 469, Schumacher 2004:473, LIV I .*men-. —> piens, moneo

mendum 'physical blemish or fault; error5 [n. o] (VarrcH-) Derivatives: menda 'fault; blemish' (LuciL+), mendax 'untruthful, lying' (Pl.+), mendacium 'a lie' (Pl.+), mendacUoquus 'lying5 (PL); mendicus 'beggarly, destitute' (Pl.+), mendicus [m.] 'beggar5 (PL+), mendicimdnium 'beggary' (Lab-), mendTcitas 'destitution' (PL+), mendicare 'to beg, be a begger' (Pl.+), mendicabulum 'a beggar's instrument' (Pl.+), mendiculus 'beggarly' (PI.). Pit. *m(e)ndo-/a-. IE cognates: Olr. mennar 'blemish' (< *mendrra-\ mind 'sign, mark' (< *mpdu?\ W. mann 'place5, marmgeni 'birthmark'; Hit mant- 'something harming', Lyd. metli-* (something negative), Lye. mete- 'harm' < *mond- (?).

Probably, menda is based on the old plural of mendum, even if menda is attested somewhat earlier. If Olr. mind is cognate, we have an Italo-Celtic correspondence *m(e)ndt}-o-. If the original meaning was 'sign, mark', one might tentatively derive the noun from PIE *mn- 'to think', as *mn-dr or as *mn-c?hr *to set the mind, be attentive'. Obviously, these are just theoretical possibilities. Bibl.: WH II: 68f, EM 396, IEW 729L, Rieken 1999:42f, Kloekhorst 2008: 555.

mens, mentis 'mind' [f. i] (Naev.+) Derivatives: amens 'insane, frantic' (PI-+), amentia 'madness, frenzy' (Ter.+), demens 'mad' (PL+), dementia 'madness5 (Pl.+), dementire 'to lose one's mind' (Lucr.+), mentio 'mention* (Andr.+); mentm 'to lie' (Pl.+), ementm 'to falsify, invent' (PL+). Pit. *mrtti-. PIE *mn-ti- [f.J 'thought, mind'. IE cognates: Skt. mati- [f.] 'thought, mind', Av. *maiti-, Lith. minus 'thought, idea', OCS pamqth 'memory, monument' < *mn-ti-; Go. ana-minds 'suspicion', Go. ga-minpi [n.] 'memory', OHG gi-munt 'recollection, memory'. By its fourth conjugation, mentire still shows its origin as a denominative to *mnti-. The meaning 'to lie' derives from a semantic change 'to have second thoughts, be inventive' > 'conjure up, lie'. Bibl.: WH II: 68-70, EM 396f, IEW 726-728, LIV 1. *men-. → memini, moneo

mSnsa 'table (for sacred offerings, for meals)' [f, a] (Naev.+) Derivatives: mensida 'small table' (PL+). Pit. *menssa- 'measured'. It cognates: U. mefa, mefa [acc.sg.], mefa [abl.sg.], mefe [loc.sg.] 'a certain sacrificial object, maybe cake'. The Latin noun is probably the feminine of the ppp. mensus 'measured' to metior9 which was formed by analogy with pensus 'weighed' < *pend-to-* If U. mefa < Pit. *menssa- (Meiser 1986: 77) is cognate with mensa, its phonological form would show that the analogical participle 'measured' had already been formed in Pit. (cf.

<!-- pdf-page: 387; printed-page-estimate: 373 -->

Meiser 1986: 164). In Latin, the meaning then shifted from the offering itself to the object on which the offerings were placed. Bibl.: WHII: 70, EM 397, IEW 703f., Untermann 2000:463f -> metior

mSnsis 'month' [m. s; abl.sg. mense, gen.pl. mensum] (Pl.+) Derivatives: menstruus 4of a month, monthly' (Varro+), menstruum 'menstrual discharge; monthly payment' (Lucr.+), menstrualis 'lasting for a month' (PL); bime(n)stris 'of two months' (Varro+), intermestris 'interlunar' (Cato+), quadrime(n)stris 'lasting four months' (Varro+), seme(n)stris 'of six months' (Varro+), trime(n)stris 4 of three months' (Cato+). Pit. *mens- 'month, moon' (> Sab. *mens-en-, Lat. » mens-is). It. cognates: U. menzne [abl.sg.] 'moon', Mars, mesene [Ioc. or abl.sg.] 'month* < *mens-(e)n-(e)i; U. anterimenzaru [gen.pl.] 'new moon' < *anter-mens-o/a- 'between-moon/month'. PIE *mehrn-s- (nom.sg. maybe *mehrn-6t) . IE cognates: Olr. mi [m.] 'month', Skt. mas- [m.] 'moon, month', OAv. ma [nom.sg.] /maHah/, YAv. mah- 'moon', marjha- [m.] 'moon, month', 'mahiia- Monthly', OP mah- 'month'; Gr. (Att.) μην [mj, gen.sg. μηνός 'moon', Ion. μείς [m.], Lesb. μηννος [gen.sg.]; Lith. minuo (gen.sg. manesio) , Lith. m^nesis 'moon, month', Latv. meness 'moon' < *mehin-es-; OCS mes$cb 'moon, month'; Go. mena, OHG mono 'moon'; ToA man, ToB mene 'moon, month'. The adj. -me(n)stris presupposes *mens-tri-, sincer: *-sr- would yield -br- (cf. membrum). The word for 'month' continues a PIE j-stem with nom.sg. in *-$ reflected in Ilr., Greek and Italic. It was probably derived from the root PIE *mehr 4to measure'. Bibl.: WH II: 71, EM 398, IEW 73 If, Leumann 1977: 352, Schrijver 1991: 159, Sihler 1995:295, Untermann 2000: 109f, 472, LIV *mehr, -> metior, mds

mentum 'chin' [n. ο] (Pl.+) Pit. *mnto-. PIE *mn-to- >'chin, mouth'. IE cognates: W. mani 'mouth, jaw, beak', Hit. meni- [n.], mena- 'face, cheek' < *men-ihi, *men-eh₂, Go, munps [m.], OIc. munnr, OE mud, OHG muM 'mouth'; OHG mindel, OIc. mel [n.] 'mouth-bit of a bridle'. Possibly cognate with the verbs e-, promineo, which points to a verbal root *men- 'to rise up, protrude'. An original verbal adj. *mw-to-, used with different nouns (e.g. *genu- [n.] 'jaw, cheek'), would explain the gender difference between m. in Gm. and n. in Italo-Celtic. Hit. meni- might continue an old dual, cf. Rieken 1999: 56f Bibl.: WH II: 72f, EM 398, IEW 968, LIV ?3.*men-. -* mime, mons

meB, -are 'to proceed, traverse' [v. I] (Naev.+) Derivatives: meatus, -us Movement, course' (Lucr.+); commeare 'to go regularly, travel' (PL+), commeatus, -us 'passage, supplies' (PL+)>praetermeare 'to move past' (Lucr.+), remeare 'to return, recede' (Pl.+); commetare 'to go constantly' (Pl.+); semita [f.]' side-path, track, pavement' (PL+), semitatim 'by side-roads' (Titin.+), frames, -itis [m.] 'footpath, track, course' (PL+).

<!-- pdf-page: 388; printed-page-estimate: 374 -->

Pit *mejo-. PIE *h₂mei-o- 'to (ex)change\ IE cognates: MW tre-myn- 'to go past'; Skt. vi mayante 'they alternate', άρα mayetat 'he should loan', moyas- 'refreshment, enjoyment', YAv. fra-mita- 'changed', maiiah- [n.] * satisfaction, pleasure'; Gr. αμείβω (< *h₂mei-gw-) 'to exchange, change'; Lith. mit 'to exchange'; Lith. mamas 'exchange'; OCS meno 'exchange, change'; OCS minpti, Ru. mirmt' 'to pass', OCS mimo 'by, past', Cz. mijetU Po. mijac 'to pass'. The verb -meare might be denominal to a noun 'movement, passage'; a deverbal verb of the type occupare is less likely, since -meare is intransitive. Commetare can be from *kom-mej-e-ta-i frequentative to meare. The nouns tramit- < *trans-mit- 'going across' and semita < *se-mit- 'going aside' may show a f-suffix added to the compounded root noun. The etymology is based on the assumption of a semantic shift 'to change' > 'change places' > 'go past' (*/m-w- in BS1., Celtic), 'change places' > 'go on, proceed' (Latin). The Latin verb would derive from a noun *h₂mei-o- * change, movement', which is not attested outside Latin. LIV reconstructs this root without initial laryngeal, but then Gr. αμείβω has to be separated. Bibl.: WH I: 254, II: 73, EM 135, 398, IEW 710, Leumann 1977: 548, Schrijver 1991: 20, Lindner 2002: 234f, Schumacher 2004: 486, LIV 2,*mejk -> moenia, murtus

merda 'dung, excrement' [f. a] (Hor.+) Pit *(s)merd-a-. PIE *smerd-h₂- 'stench'. IE cognates: Lith. smirdhi, 3s. smirdi J smirda 'to stink' < *smrd-, smardas, Latv. smafds 'smell, odour' < *$mordt-o-y Ru. smorod (dial), Ukr. smorid, gen. smorodu 'stink' < *smrd-o-s. Latin presupposes a semantic development of a collective *smerd-h₂- 'what stinks' to 'excrement'. Bibl.: WH II: 74f, EM 399, IEW 970, LIV *smerd-.

mereo 'to earn, gain (act); to deserve (dep.)' [v. II; pf.act. meruf, pf.dep. meritus sum] (Naev.+) Derivatives: merenda 'light afternoon meaF (Pl.+), mereirlx 'courtesan' (Pl-+)> meretncula [fj 'courtesan' (Pl.+)> mereincius 'of a courtesan' (Pl.+), meritum * service, reward' (PI.+), meritare 'to earn, draw pay' (Cato apud Paul ex F., Cic.+); commerere 'to commit; merit fully' (PL+), demerere 'to earn, oblige' (Pl.+)> emerere 'to serve out, complete' (Pl+), immeritd 'unjustly* (Pl.+), immerens 'undeserving' (PI.+), promerere 'to merit, deserve' (Pl.+); Morta Tate' (Andr.). Pit *mer-e- 'to earn', *mor-to- 'earned'. PIE *(s)mr-eh₁- 'to earn'? IE cognates: Olr., Mir. mart [o], mairi [i] 'death fate', MW marth 'untimely death', OW marth 'wonder', Co. marth, Bret, marzh 'miracle' < *mi-stoy -sti-; Gr. μείρομαι 'receive one's share', pf. Aeol. έμμορε 'participate' < *se-smor-e, Ion. εΐμαρται < *se-smr-tai, μέρος [η.] 'part, share', μόρος [m.] 'fate, violent death'. Schrijver (2004: 293) considers it likely that the verb is denominal because it shows

<!-- pdf-page: 389; printed-page-estimate: 375 -->

e-grade *(s)mer- instead of zero-grade (as in the statives) or o-grade (causatives). Yet denominal verbs of the second conjugation usually are intransitive, and in most cases their derivational basis can still be seen. Thus, merere remains problematic. One might envisage an original denominal *morreie- 'acquire a share* with introduction of the e-grade from a noun such as *mer-os- (Gr. μέρος), but this remains a mere hypothesis. Livingston (2004: 9) regards mereor as an original stative verb, because of the equation with Gr. μείρομαι. Livingston plausibly interprets Andronicus' form Morta as the f. of *mf-to- 'received as one's share'; this would be a close match to the Celtic words *mr-sto/i- discussed by Schrijver 2004. A derivation from 1. *(s)mer- *to remember' seems unlikely for semantic reasons. Bibl.: WH Π: 75f., EM 399, IEW 969f., Schrijver 2004, LIV 2.*smer-.

mergae 'reaping-board' [f.pL a] (Pl.+) Derivatives: merges, -Ms * sheaf of com (Verg.+). Merges can be understood as 'what one can take with the mergae\ Leumann 1977: 372 has turned the meanings around (merges 'Heugabel\ merga 'Garbe'), but this is not supported by the texts. Many scholars doubt the connection with Gr. άμέργω 'to pluck (flowers), squeeze olives1, but the two are quite similar. It is a different question whether these two forms stem from PIE *h₂^mer/lg- 'to wipe' (Skt marj-, Av. marz-, Gr, όμόργνΰμι 'tq wipe' maybe Gr. άμέλγω 'to milk'), since the semantic connection is not straightforward. Lat mergae and Gr. άμέργω may continue a separate PIE root *h₂merg-, or they might go back to a non-IE loanword of agricultural terminology. Bibl: WH II: 76, EM 399, IEW 738, Schrijver 1991: 20.

mergo, -ere 'to plunge, immerse * [v. ΠΙ; pf mersi, ppp. mersum] (Cic.+) Derivatives: mergus 'certain sea-bird' (LuciL+); mertare 'to submerge, overwhelm9

(Aca+), mersare 'to dip, submerge' (Lucr.+); emergere 4to come out of, emerge' (Ter.+), immergere 'to dip, plunge into1 (Pl.+)> submergere 'to cause to sink1

(Lucn+). \ Pit *mezge/Q~. PIE *mesg-e/o- 'to sink, wash\ IE cognates: Skt majjanti [3p.pr] 'to sink, plunge under1; Lith. mhzgoti^ Latv. mazgat 'to wash' < *mozg-. Probably, mergus is deverbal to mergo: the bird which 4dives into' the water. Bibl: WH II: 76f., EM 399, IEW 745f, Meiser 1998:119, LIV *mesg-.

merula 'blackbird' [f o] (Naev,+) Derivatives: meruleus 'coloured like a blackbird' (PL)- Pit. *mesVla- 'blackbird'. IE cognates: W. mwyalch 'blackbird', Bret. moualcxh < PBrit *mijalx < *me/isal-(s)ka\ Olr. stmolach, EMoIr. smolach, Molr. smol 'blackbird', Molr. smaol 'thrush' < Olr. *smoelach9 gen. smolchae, < *(s)moilax borrowed from Old British *moialx; OHG amsla, ama/i/usla, OE osle 'blackbird' < WGm. *amslon-, *ama/e/uslon-. Maybe OHG meisa, OS mesa, OE mase < PGm. *maison- 'tit' is also

<!-- pdf-page: 390; printed-page-estimate: 376 -->

cognate. The British and Latin forms go back to *mesVl-9 the Gm. forms to *amsl·, *amsVl-. Schrijver 1997a argues that this points to a loanword from a non-IE substratum language in Europe. Bibl.: WH Ή: 77f., EM 400, IEW 35£, Lloyd-Springer 1988: 211, Schrijver 1997a: 307-311.

merus 'pure' [adj. o/a] (Pl.+) Derivatives: meraculus 'undiluted' (PL+); merobibus [adj.] 'that drinks unmixed wine' (PL); submerus 'nearly undiluted' (PL·). Pit *mero-. PIE *merH-o- 'remaining, pure\ IE cognates: Hit marri [adv.] 'just so, gratuitously'. The word has been compared with Gr. μαρμαίρω 'to flash, sparkle', but even if 'pure' can sometimes be paraphrased as 'clear' (thus EM), there is no compelling reason to derive 'pure' from 'shining \ Puhvel connects Hit. marri, which he translates as 'just like that, at random'; this seems a better solution than Kloekhorst's (2008: 557) 'with a glimpse', who identifies marri as the hapax marra/i- '(sun)light'. If marri 'just so' goes back to a n. *morHi9 it could be related to Lat merus if from *merH-o~. The original meaning of the root may have been 'remaining, core, pure'. This, then, enables a connection with Lat. mora 'delay' < *morH-hr 'stiffening, remaining'. Bibt: WH II: 78, EM 400, IEW 734, Schrijver 1991: 20, Puhvel 2006. → mora

merx, -cis 'commodity, goods, merchandise' [f k] (PL+; nom.sg. mers PL) Derivatives: mercarJ 'to buy, trade' (PL+), mercatus, -Us 'market' (PL+), mercator 'merchant' (PL+), mercaidrius 'mercantile' (PL), mercatura 'trade' (PL+); mercimonium 'merchandise, enterprise' (PL+); commers, -rcis 'friendly intercourse' (PL), commercari 'to buy' (PL+), commercium 'trade, relationship, sexual intercourse' (PL+), praemercan 'to buy in advance' (PL+); merces, -edis 'payment' (PL+), mercen(n)arius [adj./m.] 'working for pay; hired worker' (PL+), mercedimerus 'working for hire' (Lucil.); Mercurius 'the god Mercury' (AndrH-); Mercurialis 'of M/mercury' (Cato+). Pit. *merk- 'trade, exchange'. It. cognates: Fal. mercui [dat] 'deity Merk-\ O. mirikui [datsg.] probably a deity like Mercurius < *merk-o/u-; O. amirikum [acc.sg.] 'commerce' < a- or ad- + *merk-, O. amiricatud [ppp., abl.sg.] 'sold' vel sim., denom. verb. According to Untermann, O. mirk- was borrowed from Latin. All derived from a stem *merk- also found in Faliscan and Oscan. The god Mercurius was probably the god of exchange. According to WH, the god's name was borrowed from Etruscan; in principle, the same is possible for the stem *merk- altogether. Bibl.: WH II: 74, 78f., EM 400, IEW 739, Untermann 2000: 85f, 479.

-met Τ [ptcle. of emphasis] (PL+: egomet T, nosmet 'we', vdsmei 'you', semet 'themselves', ipsemet 'he himself) Pit. *-TO/I?

<!-- pdf-page: 391; printed-page-estimate: 377 -->

PIE *-me-ti 'with'? Uncertain. One might think of PIE *me 'with' plus an added *-// (as in Latin out), or of PIE *sme, as in Skt sma, sma 'just, really', smat 'together*, Av. mat 'with', Gr. μήν (Dor. Aeol μάν), μεν 'certainly, true*. Bibl.: WHII: 80, EM 400f., Beekes 1995: 223.

meta 'cone; cone-shaped turning point; limit' [f. a] (Cato-f) Derivatives: metarT1,to measure off, lay out* (Caes.+). Pit *meta-. PIE *mehrto- 'measure, measurement*. Metari is a denominal verb to meta: 'use turn-posts to mark off the land\ WH and IEW surmise a connection with PIE *meith₂- 'to exchange, remove', but this is semantically unconvincing: the principal meaning of meta is 'cone* or 'post1. Also, the required reconstruct *meitH-o- with its lengthened grade is morphologically unattractive. If the 'cone' or 'post* was used as a mark for measuring distance or height from the beginning, meta could be derived from the root *mehr 'to measure'. Bibl.: WH II: 80f., EM 401, IEW 709, LIV *mehr. → metior

mStior, -Μ 'to measure* [v. IV; ppp. mensus (metitus)] (PL+) Derivatives: admefirl 'to measure out* (Cato+), commetm 'to pace out, measure' (Pl.H-), dimefirJ 'to measure out, weigh out* (Pl.+), permetin 'to traverse, measure exactly' " (Pl.+); mensor ;[m.] 'land-surveyor, ijheasurer' (Lucil.+), immensus 'immeasurable' (Lucr.H-). Pit *weft'-. PIE *mehrti- 'measurement5. IE cognates: Gr. -μήτις 'wisdom, skill % OE meed f 'measure* < *mehrti- 'measuring*; Skt. mimite [3s.medJ, mimihi [2s.ipv.act.] < pr. *mi-m(e)hr, s-aor. amasi [ls.med.], pf -mamur [3p.act], mame [3s,med.j 'to measure', ppp. mita- 'measured', OAv. jra-mlmaQa [2p.act] 'to determine*, YAv, maiia- 'to measure*, mata- 'formed'; Ru. mera, Sin. mera 'measure1 *mehrr-; Go. mel 'time, hour', OHG mat 'moment* < *mehrlo-. Denominal to-a noun *meti- 'measurement'. The ppp, must be analogical; Sommer 1914: 610 explains it from analogy withpensus topendo 'to weigh'. Bibl: WH II: 81 f, EM 401, IEW 703f., Schrijver 1991: 139, LIV *mehr. ~+ memisy mds

meto, -ere 'to reap, harvest* [v. 111; pf. messui (rare), ppp. messum] (Pl.+) Derivatives: messis, -is [f.; ace. messem, abl. messe] 'reaping, crop* (Pl.+), messid 'harvesting* (Varro), messor 'reaper' (Pl.+); demetere Ho mow, pick, reap' (Cato+). Pit *met-e- 'to reap'. PIE *met-e- 'to measure*. IE cognates: W. medi 'to mow, harvest*, MBret. midiff'to harvest* < PCI. %met-e/o-\ Lith. mesti, Is. metii 'to throw', Lith. metas 'year, time', matas 'measure1; CS mesti 'to throw, sweep' (lsg. metg) , Ru. mesti 'to sweep1. Unrelated: Hit. ans-> hane/iss-zt 'to wipe', CLuw. am(ma)ssa- / am(ma)ssi(ia)- £to wipe' < *h₂(o)mhrS-, hamesha- 'spring, time of harvest* < *h₂mehrsh₂o-, Gr. αμη

<!-- pdf-page: 392; printed-page-estimate: 378 -->

'shovel', άμάω 'to mow, cut* (< *h₂mhrehrie/o-), δμητος [m.] 'harvest*; OE mawan, OHG maen 'to mow', MHG mat, OE meed 'reaping*. According to Sommer 1914: 568, messmi replaced *messi on the model of its antonym seruf Ί sowed*. The root etymology is disputed Schrijver hesitantly posits a root *h₂m- with different suffixes: *h₂m-et- in meto and PCI. *met-, *h₂m-ehr in Greek άμάω and Germanic. Yet the Anatolian words for 'to wipe' show that the root of that verb and Greek άμάω was triconsonantal *h₂mhr. LIV derives *met- 'to throw' from 'measure' (via 'to aim'), but separates 'to reap*; to my mind, a semantic shift from 'measure, measure off to 'reap, harvest* is conceivable, so that we need only one root *met-. Bibl.: WH II: 82f, EM 401, IEW 703, Schrijver 1991: 20, Schumacher 2004: 483, Kloekhorst 2008: 182f, 279f., 285f., LIV ?L*met-, ?2. *met-. → mateola

metus, -us 'fear, alarm' [m. u] (Naev.+) Derivatives: metuere (metuf, meiutum) 'to be afraid of, fear' (PL+), praemetuere 'to dread in advance* (Lucr.+); metu/iculosus 'apprehensive, awful' (PL+). Pit. *met-u-. Lat. metuculosus was formed on the basis of periculdsus 'dangerous*, which is situated in the same semantic sphere. Klingenschmitt (2004: 241ft) connects metus with Olr moth [m.] 'astonishment* < *moto-, denom. mothaigedar 'to be astonished*. While semantically attractive, this explanation does not address the phonetic aspects of the etymology. Schrijver (1991: 467-470) posits a rule according to which *e yields Lat ο after w, w in front of CF, if C is not /; // and V. is not a front vowel. Metus would then be an exception, since all forms in the paradigm would have VOLat. *-fw- or *-tou-. Schrijver's rule is contested by Meiser 1998: 82, who regards several forms in mo- as analogical. In his view, metus can be regular from Pit. *metus. Bibl.: WH II: 83f., EM 402, Leumann 1977: 341, Meiser 1998: 82.

mica 'grain, crumb' [f. a] (Cato+) Pit. *meik-a-. PIE *meik-h₂- 'blinking*. Nyman 1987 shows that mica originally referred to a 'grain of salt1, and subsequently to any 'glittering crystal(line) particle*. These semantics lead him to derive mica from the same root as micare 'to quiver, dart, flash*, viz. as the 'glittering* particle. This explanation is formally more attractive that the traditional connection with Gr. (σ)μϊκρός 'small'. Semantically, I see no objections. Bibl.: WH II: 85, EM 402, IEW 966f. → mico

mico, -are 'to quiver, dart, flash' [v. I; pf. micui\ (Enn.+) Derivatives: dimicare 'to fight, contend* (Sis.+), emicare 'to dash out, jump forth" (PL+),prdmicare 'to sprout, shoot forth* (Naev.+). Pit *mikaje-, PIE *mikH-(e)ie- 'to blink*. IE cognates: Olr. de-meccim 'despise*, W. ed-mygaf'l admire*; Ru. miknt' (dial) 'to stuff (a bag)*, Cz. mikati 'to move abruptly\ USorb. mikac 'to blink* < PIE *meik-, CS mtcbta 'vision, apparition*, Ru. mecta 'dream,

<!-- pdf-page: 393; printed-page-estimate: 379 -->

day-dream' < *mik-. The pf micuT suggests a stem *mikV-y hence a laryngeal-final root. The basic meaning of Latin is 'to dash, spring forth, move fast back and forth'. In Slavic, the same meaning co-occurs with 'to blink' and 'to see'. In Celtic, only the latter is attested. Hence, the PIE meaning may have been 'to blink'. Bibl: WH I: 353, II: 86, EM 402, IEW 712f, Meiser 2003: 138, LIV l^m^Yh^

migrO, -are 'to change residence, move' [v. I] (Pl.+) Derivatives: admigrare 'to go and live with' (PL), commigrare 'to migrate' (PL+), demigrare 'to go away, depart' (PL+), emigrare 'to move out' (PL+)> immigrare "to go and take up residence' (Pl.+), remigrare 'to move back to one's home' (PL+). Pit *migro~. PIE *h₂mi-gw-ro- 'changing'. IE cognates: Gr. αμείβω 'to change', άμοιβός 'changing', αμοιβή 'change'. Probably a denominal verb to *migro-, which can be a roadj. to the same stem *h₂migw- as reflected in Gr. αμείβω, A labiovelar suffix is rare in PIE. Bibl.: WH II: 86, EM 402, IEW 713, Schrijver 1991: 20, LIV *h₂meigy-, — meo

miles, -itis 'soldier' [m. /] (PL+; Imllessl PI. AuL52S) Derivatives: militare 'to sefye as a soldier' (Pl.+)> militaris 'of the army, of soldiers' (PL+), militarius 'soldierlike' i^Pl.); militia 'military service' (PL+). Miles was the common foot-soldier. The semantic sphere recalls pedes 'pedestrian' and eques 'rider' (*-//- < ♦hti-t- 'who goes'), but the first element mil· is unclear. It is tempting to connect milia [pi.] 'thousand(s)\ hence *mili-it- 'who goes with/by the thousand' (with simplification of *miUl· to *mllit- by analogy with the other nouns); or, if the literal meaning of the suffix -it- was already opaque, 'thousand-man\ Bibl: WH II: 87, EM 402. → mille

milium 'millet' [n. o] (Cato+) Derivatives:'miliaria 'bird fattened for eating, ortolan; dodder' (Varro+). Pit, *meljo-T PIE *melh₂-i [n.]? IE cognates: Gr. μελΐνη [f.] 'millet', Lith. malnos fi pi. 'kind of millet'. If from *meliom with /-mutation (of the type nihil, similis), milium can be cognate with Gr. μελΐνη. The Latin, Gr, and Lith, words could be independent derivatives of *melh₂- 'to grind' (e-grade in Gr. and Lat, ograde in Lith.), thus 'the grain which can/is to be ground'; or they could be three derivatives of a common ancestor nom.acc. *melhri, maybe gen.sg, *mlh₂-n-os / *melh₂-n-s. Bibl.: WH II: 87f„ EM 403, IEW 716-719, Leumann 1977: 109, EIEC 383.

mille 'thousand' [n,; adj, i; sg, indecl, pi, mVlia, milia, gen. milium] (Pl.+) Derivatives: mxliarium 'milestone, column, vessel' (Cato+), mTliarius 'of a thousand, belonging to the thousands' (Varro+), mTlie(n)s [adv.] 'a thousand times' (Pl.+).

<!-- pdf-page: 394; printed-page-estimate: 380 -->

Pit *srmxeslJ. PIE *sm-ih₂-ghes-l-ih₂ 'having one thousand'. IE cognates: Skt sahasra-, Av. hozajjra- < Ilr. *sajhasra- < PIE *5ΐρ-^έ5ΐο- 'having one thousand'; Gr. χίλιοι, Ion. χεαιοι, Aeol. χέλλιοι 'thousand' < PGr *h*ehliio- < PIE *ghesli(H)o- 'of a thousand'. Double -//- in mille can be interpreted as indicating palatal /, not necessarily double *-//-. The mostly accepted etymology as *sm-ih₂-ghes-l-ih₂ 'one thousand' is based on the comparison with the Ilr. forms for 'thousand' which reflect *sm-ghes-lo-> and with the Greek form. Adjectival *ghes-lo- 'heap' was substantivised to f. gheslih₂-, and 'one' consequently acquired the f. form. Meiser 1998 posits a phonetic development from *sm-ih₂-ghes-l-ih₂ > Pit HmTxesti > *m\heli > *rmhile > mille. He attributes final short *-i in Pit to loss of the final laryngeal in *-ih₂, but this development is not certainly attested (its reconstruction for the 5-stems is uncertain). Alternatively, Pit may have analogically changed the inflectional category of 'thousand' to a n. /-stem; the model may have been centum 'hundred', Sihler explains n. -e as a back-formation to the pi. rmlia (cf. mare - maria). Bibl.: WH II: 88£, EM 403, IEW 446, Leumann 1977: 141, 491, Coleman 1992: 407, Sihler 1995: 424f, Meiser 1998: 174. -> hostus, miles, sem-

minae 'threats; protruding parts of a wall' [£pL a] (Pl.+) Derivatives: (1) minan 'to threaten' (P1-+), minax 'menacing, threatening' (Pl.+), minaciae [f.pl.] 'threats' (PL); comminan 'to threaten' (Pl.+), eminan 'to issue threats' (PL), eminatio 'the act of threatening' (PL), interminan 'to utter threats' (Pl.+); minitareft 'to threaten' (Andr.+), minitabiliter 'menacingly' (Pac.+); (2) eminere 'to stick out, protrude' [pf. eminui\ (PL+), eminulus 'projecting' (Lucil.+), minere 'to lean forward, project' (Lucr.). Pit *(eks-)men-e- 'to stick out', *men-a- 'part which sticks out' > 'threat'. PIE *m(e)n-ehr. In theory, these forms could reflect *min- or a stem *men- which changed to -min- in non-initial syllable, and was thence imported into minae and minan. The fact that e-minere can be connected with mentum and mons makes the second solution more attractive. Thus, the root *men- 'to stick out, protrude' is preserved in stative e-min-ere. We may assume minae < *men-a- meaning first 'protruding part' and then 'threat', and from mind- was derived minan. The verb served as the basis for minax and for the frequentative minitare. Lucr. minere is a recent back-formation to eminere. The e-grade in *men-e- might be from *mn-ehr (unless *mnV~ yielded Latin *monV- or *manV-y see s.v. maneo). Bibl.: WH II: 90, EM 403, IEW 726, LIV ?3.*men-. → mentum, mons

Minerva 'goddess of handicrafts' [f. a] (VOLat (menrva, menerva Veii, 6th c, menerva CIL 2498 Praeneste, PL+) Derivatives: minerval [n.] 'fee for tuition' (Varro), Minervius 'of Minerva' (Varro-*-), promenervat 'promonet' (Carmen Saliare apud Fest). Pit *menes-wo- 'intelligent, understanding'. It cognates: FaL menerua [nom.], menerua [gen. or dat], meneruai [dat], PaeL minerua [datsg.?], mineruai [datsg.],

<!-- pdf-page: 395; printed-page-estimate: 381 -->

O. menere(vas) [gen.sg.]. PIE *men-os, -es- [n.] 'thought'. IE cognates: Skt manas- [η.], Αν. manah- 'mind, spirit', Gr. μένος [η.] 'spirit, passion, might, force', ευμενής 'well-disposed (towards)\ Myc. e-u-me-ne. Meiser 1998: 117 adopts the etymology *menes-uehr 'provided with a mind, intelligent'. It was proposed by Rix 1981: 117ff., who posited a sound law *-su- > Latin -rv-, also for acervus, protervus, caterva anafitrvus- Since the deity Menerva is attested in Etruscan from the sixth c. onwards, the sound law must have taken place before that time. Rix admits that beside Latin, also Faliscan and Umbrian qualify as possible sources for the Etruscan word, and hence for *su > rv. The raising of *men- to min- is regarded as irregular, but in view of the same problem found in minae, minari, and since no inherited words are attested with Latin ImenVtl, it is possible that *menV- regularly turned to minV- at a certain point in VOLat. Compare Watkins 1973b: 196 for the raising of *e to i after word-initial labials. The gloss promenervat would testify to a denominal verb *pro-menervare 'to warn'. Bibl.: WH TI: 90£, EM 404, Leumann 1977: 179, Untermann 2000: 470. -^ mens, meminf, moneo

minor, -or, -us 'smaller, less, inferior' [adj. r] (Lex XII+) Derivatives: minus, -oris [nj 'smaller number, less' (Pl.+), minus [adv.] 'less', minusculus 'somewhat smallej' (Pl.+), minu/imus 'smallest, least' (Pl.+), mlscellus 'very small; miscellaneous' (Cato, Varro, of uva and; vitis: 'an inferior type of grape and the vine producing if), minister 'helping; servant, assistant' (Varro+), ministrare 'to wait on, provide' (Pl.+), ministra 'provider, female servant' (Varro+), ministerium 'service, attendance' (Varro+), ministrator 'attendant' (Naev.+); administrare 'to assist, perform' (Pl.+), administer 'helper' (Varro+), administro 'female helper' (Varro+); (2) minuere [minui, minutum] 'to reduce in size, lessen' (PL+), minutus 'small, short' (Pl.+), minutulus 'very small' (Pl.+), mimitim 'gradually' (Cato+), mimitdtim 'id,' (Varro+); comminuere 'to break into pieces, smash' (Pl.+), deminuere 'to diminish, deduct' (Pl.+), deminutid 'reduction, deduction' (Varro+), imminuere 'to diminish, reduce1 (Pl.+). Pit. *minds,:, *minos 'less', *minos-tero- 'smaller', *minu-je/o- 'to lessen'. It. cognates: O. minstreis, mistreis [gen.sg.f.] 'smaller* < *min-Vs-tero-; O. minfs [adv.] 'less' < *minVs; O. menvum [inf.] 'to lessen'. PIE *moihruo- 'small, little', comp. *meihrios-, -is- 'less', *mi-n(e)-hr 'to make less' » *mi-n(e)-u-, IE cognates: Skt. minati, minanti 'to damage, diminish', Gr. μείων 'smaller', μινύΰω 'to disappear, to lessen'; OCS mbnjii 'smaller, lesser, younger', mbnjbsi [f], mbnje [n.], Ru. man'sij [m.] 'smaller, lesser, younger' < *mi-n-i(e/o)s-jo-, Go. mins 'less', minniza 'smaller, lesser' < *minuiza-\ ToB maiwe 'small, young'.

Lat minimus, minister (< *minos-tero~) are derived from *minos, -os- by means of productive processes. Lat. mlscellus < *minuscellus, dim. to minusculus. The meaning 'miscellaneous' seems to have come about due to the semantic influence of miscere. For the PIE etymology, I follow Meiser's argument that minor cannot be based on an

<!-- pdf-page: 396; printed-page-estimate: 382 -->

old w-stem. The Gm. and BSL adj. meaning 'less' are built on a form ^minu-is-> which also looks quite secondary. Hence, the original comp. *meihrios- was apparently influenced by the nasal present *mii}u-(ie-) in Italic, yielding *mi-n-os, -es-, -os- 4 smaller5. Bibl.: WH Π: 91-93, 95, EM 404f, IEW 711, Leumann 1959: 47-49 (for miscellus\ Meiser 1998: 154, Untermann 2000: 471,477f., LIV L*meiH-. → nimis

mirus 'remaricable, astonishing' [adj. o/o] (Andr.+; usually predicative mxrum est) Derivatives: rmrari 'to be amazed' (PL+), rmraculus [adj.] 'freakish' (Pl.+), rmraculum 'wonder, marvel' (Cato+), mirabilis 'marvellous' (Pl.+); odmirari 'to be surprised, admire' (PL+), demiran'lo wonder, be utterly astonished' (PL+); perrmrus 'very remarkable * (PL+); mirificus 'amazing' (Ter.+); rmrio 'an ugly mask' (Ace. apud Varronem). Pit. *smeiro-. PIE *smei-ro- [n.] 'laughter'. IE cognates: Skt. ό-smera- 'without smiling', OE smcer(e) 'lips', gal-sm<zr(e) 'inclined to laughter' < PGm. *smairja-, OE smceran 'to mock'; Skt. smayate 'smiles', Gr. φιλο-μμειδής 'who likes to laugh', Latv. smiet 'to laugh', OCS smijatisg, ToB smvyam 'smiles'. These words are often connected with PIE *smel· 'to laugh', but EM and Sihler are sceptical about the semantic justification. Indeed, it is difficult to arrive from an adj. PIE *smei-ro- 'laughing' or 'ridiculous' at 'remarkable'. Vine 2002: 334 solves this problem by observing that the oldest form was probably mirum, from which the adj. mirus was back-formed. Thus, we may be dealing with an original collective noun *smei-ro- 'laughter, smiling'. Bibl.: WH Π: 94f, EM 406, IEW 967f, Sihler 1995: 214, Meiser 1998: 112. -> comis

misceO 'to mix, blend' [v. II; pf miscm, ppp. mixturn] (Pl.+; CIL 560 Praeneste misc [2s.ipv.act]) Derivatives: mixtura 'the mixing, combining' (Lucn-l·), mixtim 'in an intermingled manner' (Lucr.), mixtarius 'mixing-vessel' (LuciL); admiscere 4to add, include1 (PL+), admixtio 'admixture' (Varro+), commiscere 'to mix together, combine' (PL+), commixtura 'mixture' (Cato), immiscere 'to mix in, merge' (Lucn+), impermixtus 'unmixed' (LuciL), permiscere 'to mix well, combine' (Cato+), prdmiscue [adv.] 'without distinction, commonly' (Vzno+\promiscam [adv.] 'without distinction' (PL+). Pit. *rnik-sk-e/o- 'to mix'. PIE *mik-sk-e/o-. IE cognates: Olr. mescaid 'mixed, confuses', W. (cy-)mysgaf Ί mix'; Skt. micchamana- [ptc.med.] evivid', meksayati 'to mingle, stir', mimik$u- 'desiring for mixing [with milk] (of Soma)', misra- 'mixed, blended'; Gr. μείγνυμι 'to mingle, mix', μίσγω 'id.', aor.ps. μιγηναι, Lith. misras 'mixed, blended', maisyti, 3s. rnciiso 'to mix', OCS mesiti 'to mingle, mix' < *moii:-; OE miscicm, OHG miscen Ho mix'. The reason why this verb takes the 2nd cj. is unclear. It is also unclear whether Praenestine misc is a remnant of a simple thematic stem *misce/o-. The adv.

<!-- pdf-page: 397; printed-page-estimate: 383 -->

promiscam in PI. seems to point to an adj. *promiscus, hence also a simple thematic stem. Prdmiscuus is regularly derived from (pro)miscere. Mixtum may reflect *mixiium (with syncope before long-vowel endings). The pf. miscuf has an unusual a-pf. after a heavy stem, which Meiser 2003 attributes to euphonic reasons, miscuf replacing an earlier s-pf. *misxf < *miksk-s-. But it seems more likely that the pf. to this pr. is recent altogether. Bibl.: WHII: 9SU EM 406, IEW 714, Meiser 2003: 247f, LIV *meik-.

miser, -a, -um 'poor, unfortunate* [adj. o/a] (Naev.+) Derivatives: miseriter 'pathetically' (Lab.), miseritudo 'pity* (Ace), miserere/ϊ 'to feel or show compassion' (PI.+), me miserescit Ί feel sorry* (Pl.+), miserari 'to feel sorry for' (PI.+), miseria 'woe, distress' (Pl.+), miserulus 'somewhat unfortunate' (Laev.+); misericordia 'compassion' (Pl.+), misericors 'merciful' (Pl.+), miserimonium 'misery' (Lab.). Pit *misro-. PIE *mh₂isro-? IE cognates: ToA msar 'difficult' (Pinault 1998: 17). Possibly connected with maereo, but no acceptable PIE pedigree has been found; see s.v. maereo. v- Bibl.: WH II: 8f, EM 407. → maereo

mitat 'gives, donates' (Duenoynscr., Tibur base) Pit. *mito- 'exchanged'. . ? PIE *(h₂)mi(H)-to-, '

Lat. mitat lmit(t)atl is explained convincingly by Vine 1999d: 297 as a 3s.pr.ind. to mita- 'to give (in exchange)', a denom. verb to a ppp. *wfto- 'exchanged'; see meo for the PIE root. Bibl.: Unteimann 2000: 469.

mftis £sweet and juicy, soft, gentle' [adj. /] (Pl.+) Derivatives: mitescere 'to become soft, grow mild' (Pac.+); commitigare 'to soften5

(Ten), { Pit. w ; - . -T PIE *m(e)h₁i-ti- 'soft\ IE cognates: W. mwydion 'soft parts' < *meit- < *mehii-ti-, Olr. mm 'soft' < *miHni- < *mhii-ni-, W. mwyn 'tender, mild\ Bret, moan 'thin, fine' < PCL *meino/a/i- < *mehii-n-; Skt. mayas- 'refreshment, enjoyment', YAv. maiiah- [n.] 'satisfaction, pleasure' < *meiH-os-, OPr. mijts, Lith. mielas, Latv. mifs 'nice, sweet, dear', OCS milt 'pitiable', Ru. milyj 'sweet, dear' < *m(e)iH-lo-. Possibly, Pit. *miti- and the other nominal forms in IE languages are derived from a (verbal) derivative *mhri- to *mhr 'to measure'. Bibl.: WH II: 96£, EM 407, IEW 71 If., Schrijver 1991: 244.

mitto, -ere 'to release, let go; send, throw1 [v. Ill; pf. misl> ppp. missurn] (Andr.+) Derivatives: missus, -us 'shooting, sending' (Lucr.+), missiculare 'to send frequently' (PL), missile [nj 'missile' (Cato+), missilis 'that may be thrown or shot'

<!-- pdf-page: 398; printed-page-estimate: 384 -->

(Lucr.+); admittere 'to admit, allow' (PL+), admtssarius [m. I adj.] 'stallion, ass; kept for breeding' (Pl.+), admissio 'controlled mating' (Varro), admissum 'crime' (Laev.+), admissura 'copulation, breeding" (Varro+), amittere 'to send away, release, lose' (Naev.+), committere 'to entrust to, bring about, commit, join' (Pl.+), commission 'crime' (Pl.+), commissure 'joint, juncture* (Cato+), demittere 'to drop, shed, send down' (Naev.+), demissicius 'reaching to the ground' (PL), dlmittere 'to send away, dismiss, give up' (PL+), emittere 'to send out, release' (PL+), emissicius 'sent out as a spy' (PL), emissus^ -us 'emission' (Lucr.), immittere 'to cause to go, send, let in\ intermittere 'to interrupt, leave open' (PL+), omittere 'to release, abandon, omit' (PL+), permittere 'to allow, cede, leave to' (PL+), praetermittere 'to overlook, neglect' (Ter.+), promittere 6to send forth, promise, guarantee' (PL+), remittere 'to send back, release, relax' (PL+), remissarius 'that can be slid back easily' (Cato), remissio 'sending back, cancellation' (Varro+), reprdmittere 'to promise, guarantee' (Pl.+), tra(ns)mittere 'to send over, let through', transmissus, -us 'bequest, crossing' (Pac.+); cosmittere (Paul, ex F.). Pit *meit-e/o-y ppp. *m/7-fo-. It. cognates: SPic. meitims [nom.sg.], meitimum [acc.sg.] 'monument' < *meit-mo-. PIE pr. *m(e)ith₂- 'to exchange, remove'. IE cognates: Skt pr. methete [3s.med.], mimetha [pf.] 'to become hostile, quarrel', OAv. aor. hsmMibumoist 'joins', mdiOat 'robs', YAv. pr. paiti-miunaiti 'sends away'; Go. in-maidjan 'to change'. From original 'exchange', the meaning developed to 'give, bestow' (attested in VOLat mitat) and 'let go, send*. The hapax cosmittere in Paul, ex F. is not trustworthy enough to warrant an etymology with *sm-. The pr. mittere is often explained from *mitere by the littera-rulz (see s.v. cella); this is possible, but cannot be ascertained. Note that in most instances of this rule, the old and the new form are attested side by side; with mitto, there is no trace of *mi/o. Bibl.: WH Π: 97-99, EM 407f., IEW 715, Sihler 1995: 584, Meiser 2003: 110, LIV *meith₂-. → med, mitat, mutuus

modus 'measured amount, size, limit' [m. o] (Naev.+) Derivatives: (1) modo 'just, only' (PL+), admodum 'to a great extent, completely' (Naev.+), commodum 'even now, just' (PL+), praemodum 'exceedingly' (Andr.+), quomodo 'how' (Pl.+), modulus 'unit of measurement' (Varro+), modicus 'moderate, limited' (PL+); commodus 'convenient, favourable' (PL+), commodore 'to provide, put at the disposal' (Pl.+), commoditas 'opportuneness, advantage' (PL+), commodulum, -e [adv.] 'fairly suitably' (PL+), accomodare 'to fit, apply' (Pl.+X incommodus 'troublesome, unpleasant' (PL+); (2) modestus 'restrained, mild' (PL+X immodestus 'lacking in restraint' (PL+), modestia 'restraint' (PL+), immodestia 'lack of restraint' (PL+); moderare 'to control, rule, restrain' (PL+), moderator 'wielder, ruler' (Naev.+), moderatrix 'who restrains, female manager' (PL+), moderatim 'gradually' (Lucr.), moderanter 'in a controlling manner' (Lucr.), admoderari 'to control' (PL); (3) modius 'measuring-vessel' (PL+), modiolus 'bucket, vessel' (Cato+), trimodia 'vessel with the capacity of three modii' (Varro+), trimodius 'the measure of three modii' (PL), modialis 'holding a modius' (PL), semodius 'half a

<!-- pdf-page: 399; printed-page-estimate: 385 -->

modius' (Cato+). Pit *medo- 'measure, judgement', *medos- 'id/; *merf-? It cognates: (1) U. mefs, mers [nom.sg.], mersei, mersi [nom.sg. + si] 'law' < *medos; U. mersto [acc.sg.m.], mersta, meersta [acc.sg.f], merstu [abLsg.m.], merstaf, mersto [acc.pLf.] '?' (a characteristic of augural birds) < *mede/osto-; U. mersus [nom.sg.m.], mersuva [abtsg.f.], mersuva [acc.pLn.] 'according to prescription' < *medesuo-; (2) O. meddiss, meddis, meddis [nom.sgJ, μεδεκον [acc.sg.], medikeis [gen.sg.], medikei [datsg.], medikid [abl.sg.], meddiks, μεδδειξ [nom.pL], Man\ medix, Mars, medis, meddiss [nom.sg.], PaeL medix, Vol. medix [nom,pt] 'local official, magistrate, judge' < *med(-V(s))-dik- 'saying law'; (λ μεδεκαν [acc.sg.] 'female meddix9; O. meddikkiai, meddikiai, medikkiai, μεδικιαι [loc.sg.] 'the office of meddix* < *meddik-ia-\ O. medicim [acc.sg.], meddixud [abLsg.], μεδδικεν [loc.sg. + en] 'office and/or place of the meddix* < *meddik-io-; O. medicatud [abtsg.m. of ppp.] 'to sentence', denom, *meddik-a-; O. medicatinom [acasg.] 'judgement' < *meddik-a-ti-n-o-. PIE *med-o- 'measure', *med-o/es- 'measure', IE cognates: Gr. μήδεα 'counsels, plans', Arm. mit 'thought' < *med-os-, Schrijver rejects the earlier explanation of modus < *mod-o- on the strength of (λ meddiss < *med(V)-dik-, In his view, *medo- turned to Lat *modo- phonetically, and similarly in the nom,sg. of the ^-stem *med-os > *modos. The rounded vowel then spread in the s-stem paradigm. To his advantage one may adduce the fact that IL mefs can be the nom.sg. of the m. 0-stem *medo-; but O- meddiss may contain a root noun *med~. A conclusive argument in favour of *medo- may be that *modo- would regularly yield *mado-, at least, by Schrijver's rules. From the s-stem, Latin modestus < *medes-to- was derived (matched by U. mersto-), as well as moderare < *medes-a-. The e-grade in Greco-Armenian *medros- can stem from the verb, cf. Gn μήδομαι. This is uncertain, but it is irrelevant for Italic, unless Sabell. *med-dik- represents *medrdik-. Bibl.: WH II: 99f., EM 408f., IEW 705f., Leumann 1977: 378, Schrijver 1991: 466-470, Untermann 2000: 455-462, 473f, Stuber 2002: 126, LIV l.*med-. -> medeor9 meditor

moenia, -ium 'defensive walls' [n.pL i] (Naev,+; sg. moene in Naev.) Derivatives: moemre, mumre 'to fortify, safeguard' (Lex XIK; moen- in PI.), mimTtio 'defence work, fortification' (Sis.+); admoemre 'to besiege' (PK+), circummoe/Hrnre 'to surround with a wall' (Pl.+), commoe/uriire 'to surround with fortifications' (PI.+), Pit *moini- 'protective wall'. PIE *(H)moi-ni- 'construction'? IE cognates: OIn do-dimen* 'to fix, tie' < PCI. *mi-nu-, Skt pn minotu [3s.ipv.act], aor. amesta [3s.med], pf vimimaya, ta-ptc. mita- 'to fix, establish, build', YAv, bBrBzi-mita- "highly built'; Latv. miet 'to drive piles'. The retention of oe in moenia (as opposed to the usual change to u) is ascribed to fear of polysemy with regard to munia 'achievements'. A connection with murms 'charge, duty' < *moin-os- cannot be rejected with certainty: a wall has defensive duties.

<!-- pdf-page: 400; printed-page-estimate: 386 -->

Bibl.: WH II: 100f., EM 409f, IEW 709, Meiser 1998: 87, Schumacher 2004: 484, LP/ l.*mei-. → munus, murus

moles, -is 'large mass, heap' [f j] (Acc.+) Derivatives: moUri 'to labour, build up, strive' (Pl.+), molltus, -us 'strenuous effort' (PL), molimen ' force, effort' (Lucr.), moUmentum 'effort, labour' (Sis.+); απιδϊϊη 'to remove, obliterate' (PL+), admoliri 4to exert oneself, lay violent hands on' (PL+), commolm 'to construct, set in motion' (Caecil.+), demolm 'to throw off, demolish' (Naev.+), emdlTn 'to carry through'; molestus 'troublesome, tiresome' (PL+), motestia 'distress, annoyance' (Pl.+). Pit *molo- 'labour, effort', ^mol-i-je- 4to labour', *mel-e/os- [n.] 'trouble'. PIE *mel-e/os- [n.], *moI(-o> . There is a slight possibility that molestus reflects *molesto- with pretonic shortening of*~VH- in front of a resonant. More likely is an original j-stem *melos, -es- 'trouble, obstacle' > *molos> from which mo- was introducted into *melesto- (thus Schrijver 1991: 469f.). The absence of unrounding to *malesto- confirms this analysis. This also discredits an origin as *m(e)h₃-l- (thus LIV), which would not yield Pit. *mel-. Schrijver argues that moles has replaced a root noun, the nom.sg. of which may have been *m<5/. However, the later attestation of moles means that it could also be deverbal to molin. The whole group could then be based on an adj. or noun *molo- 'labour, effort'. The PIE root is unclear: to Gr. μωλος [m.] 'battle' «— *'trouble', μώλυς 'enervated, weak', μόλις [adv.] 'hardly'? Or to Gr. βλώσκω (< *μλώ-σκω), aor. μολεΐν 'to go, come' < PIE *mlh₃-? Or to Gr μέλω 'to be anxious, care for'? Bibl.: WH II: lOlf, EM 410, IEW 746, Schrijver 1991: 120f., 338, 342, 469f., Isebaert 1992: 201, LIV *meh₃-.

mollis 'soft, gentle' [adj. i) (PL+) Derivatives: mollitia 'softness, luxury' (PL+), molliculus 'soft, tender' (PL+), mollTre 'to make soft' (Ter.+), mollitudo 'softness' (Pac.+), mollescere 4to become soft' (Lucr.+); molluscus 'having a thin shell' (PL+). Pit. *moldu-(i-Y PIE *mld-u- 'soft'. IE cognates: W. blydd 'soft', Skt. mrdu- 'delicate, soft', Gr *βλαδύς 'powerless' (in βλαδεϊς Hsch.) The appurtenance of the Gr. forms is uncertain. Mollis < *molwi- < *mollwi- < *moldui- < *mjdu-i-. The w-stem adj. were remade into /-stems in Latin. Lat molluscus and molluscum 'kind of fungus that grows on maple-trees' (Plin.) shows the older w-stem: *mldu-sko- > *moldusko- > molluscus. Bibl.: WH II: 103f, EM 41 Of., IEW 716-719, Schrijver 1991: 20f., Meiser 1998: 64, LIV *meld-.

molo, -ere 'to grind in a mill' [v. Ill; pi, molui, ppp. rnolitum] (PL+) Derivatives: mola 'millstone; cake of ground barley and salt' (Naev.-f-), molarius 'of a mill' (Cato+), moletrina 'milling-place' (Cato), molile 'component of a mill' (Cato), rnolitum [n.] 'flour' (PL); immolore 'to sacrifice, sprinkle with flour' (Naev.+). Pit. sg. *mela-, pi. *mal-entu It. cognates: U. kumaltu, kumultu, comoltu

<!-- pdf-page: 401; printed-page-estimate: 387 -->

[3s.ipv.II], kumates, kumate, comatir [ppp·, abtpl.n.] < *kom-m(o)lH-e/o-, *kom-mlH-to- 'to crush'. Maybe U, maletu [accsg.m.], attribute to 'salt', PIE *melh₂-/*mlh₂- [pr] 'to crush, grind', *molh₂-h₂- [f ] 'mill(stone)\ IE cognates: Olr. meilid*, meil, W. malu, MBret malaff'io grind' < PCI. *male/o- (<?-grade in Olr. from sb.), Hit. malla- 'to mill, grind' < *molh₂-, CLuw, mal(h)u- 'to break' < *melh₂-u-, Myc. me-re-ti-ri-ja 'woman grinders', me-re-u-ro 'flour', Gr. μύλη 'handmill, mill', Arm. malem 'to crush', Lith malti, Latv. malt 'to grind, miir < *molH-, OCS mleu, Ru. molot\ Is. melju 'to grind, miir < *mIH-, *melH-, Go. malan < *moIH-. Skt. mpiati, mrnati 'to crush, grind' < *ml/r-n-H-. Immolare is a denominative to mola. In the athematic paradigm of the PIE verb, *melhrti gave Pit. *melati, whence with rounding in front of velar / > VOLat *molatL The noun mala is either derived from this stage, or reflects PIE *molhrh₂- (preferable in view of Gr. μύλη < *mo!i-a)9 in which case the expected unrounding of *mo- > *ma- might not have happened because the first syllable was originally closed by the cluster*-///-. LIV reconstructs final *-h₂ on the strength of CLuw. malhuta 'broke' and other forms, in which case the second e in Myc. /mele-/ would be secondary. Bibl.: WH II: 104f., EM 411, IEW 716-719, Schrijver 1991: 103, 216, 394, 473, Har6arson apud Rix 1995a: 406, Rix 1999: 517, Untermann 2000: 410-411, 444, Schumacher 2004: 470ff, LIV *melh₂-, -> malleus ·

moned 'to remind, tell (of)'.[v. II] (Pl.+) ; Derivatives: monetrvc [£] 'adviser' (PL), monitor 'adviser' (Ten+), monu/imentum 'statue, memorial, tomb' (Pl.+); admonere 'to advise, warn', commonere 'to remind' (PL+), commonefacere 'id.' (PI.+), promonere 'to warn openly' (PL+), submonere 'to advise privately' (Ter+); monstrum 'prodigy, sign, monster' (Pl.+), mostellaria 'a play about ghosts' (PL+), mdnstrare 'to point out, reveal' (PL+), mdnstratio 'showing' (Ter.+), monstrificabilis 'strange' (LuciL); commonstrare 'to point out, reveal' (Pl.+), demonstrare 'to indicate, describe' (Pl.+), praemonstrare 'to show beforehand, foretell' (PL+), praemonstrator 'guide' (Ter.); momr/dula 'jack-daw1

(Pl.+); Moneta 'title of Juno; temple where money was coined' (Andr.+). Pit *moneje-. It cognates: maybe SPic, mufqlum [nom.sg,?J if'monument', PIE *mon-eie- 'to make think of, remind'. IE cognates: Skt manayati 'to honour, respect', OAv. manaiia-, YAv, mqnaiisn [caus.ptc.act] 'making think'; ?OBret guo-monim 'to promise'. Lat monstrum < *mone-stro-. In regular *mostro-, η was reintroduced. Mostellaria < *mone-stro-lari- has the regular outcome. The name Moneta is a derivative in *-eto- from moneo, created on the model of the stative verbs in -ere : *-eto-; its original meaning can be interpreted as 'who reminds' = 'the memory' (Livingston 2004: 23-30). The absence of the change *mo- > ma- in open syllable is conspicuous. Schrijver suggests that ovocalism was restored in monere on the model of other causatives. Bibl.: WH II: 107-110, EM 412f, IEW 726^728, Schrijver 1991: 472, Meiser 1998: 117, Untermann 2000: 480, LIV 1 «*men-. —+ memim, mens

<!-- pdf-page: 402; printed-page-estimate: 388 -->

monlle 'necklace, collar7 [n. /] (Afran.-f) Pit *monjo- 'neck7. PIE *mon-i- 'neck'. IE cognates: Olt rnuin [£J 'upper part of the back between shoulders and neck\ MW mwn7 OBret. mun 'neck' < PCL *moni-, Olr. muinel, MW mwnwgyl 'neck7 < *moni-fdo-; SkL manya- [f.] 'neck', mani- [m.] 'ornament carried around the neck7, YAv. zaranu-maini- 'with a golden neck-ornament* (an epithet of a vulture), pairi-maniia- 'neck-protection', manaodri- [f.] 'neck'; OCS monisto 'necklace'; OHG mana7 OE manu 'mane* < *mon-\ OIc. men, OE mene 'necklace7 <

Since there existed a productive pattern of deriving -/i-adj. with a preceding long vowel from short-vowel i- and u-stems (Leumann 1977: 350), monlle can be derived directly from a preform *moni- *neck\ In that case, the absence of unrounding to *ma- is unexpected. If the PIE i-stem was thematized to Pit. *monie/o~, the first syllable was closed, and */wo- would be retained* Bibl.: WH II: 108, EM 412, IEW 747f, Schrijver 1991:473.

mons, -tis 'mountain' [m. i] (Naev.+) Derivatives: montanus 'of the mountains, mountainous7 (Lucil.+), montivagus * mountain-ranging7 (Lucr.+); prdmuntu/orium 'headland, promontory, spur7 (Pac.+). Pit. *montl·. PIE *mon-ti- 'protrusion, height5. IE cognates: W. mynydd, OCo. menit, OBret. monid 'mountain' < *mon-io-\ Av. maiti- 'mountain, height' < *mn-ti-; OIc. menir 'ridge of a roof < *»iom-, mcena 'to tower7. The meaning of prdmuntu/orium makes it attractive to derive it from mons, but the morphology is unclear: *pro-mont-orium? The suffix -orium is usually derived from nouns in -tor which belong to verbal stems (Leumann 1977: 301), hence one might adopt an alternative etymology as *pro-moni-tor 'warner7 (to moneo\ and regard a promontory as a clear 'signpost' in the landscape. This would require syncope of medial *~e- in *promonetoriom* In mdns, the o-grade is unexpected; the Latin noun looks like a cross oi*mn-ti- and *mon-i(o)-. Bibl.: WH II: 108f., EM 413, 538, IEW 726, LIV ?3.*men-. → mention, minae

mora 'delay, lapse of time' [f. δ] (Pl.+) Derivatives: morare/ϊ [act. Naev.Enn.Pac.J 'to delay, hold back, remain7 (Naev.+); commoran 'to detain, remain' (Pl.+), demorarl 'to keep waiting, linger7 (Pl.+), remorari 'to wait; hold up' (Pl.+), remora 'hindrance, delay7 (Pl.+). Pit. *morH-a- 'delay7. PIE *morh₂-. IE cognates: Olr. maraid, -mair 'lasts, remains' < PCL *mare/o- < *mrH-e-; Olr, mer 'senseless7 < *merH-o- (appurtenance uncertain); Skt. amUrchat (AV) [3s.ipf.], murta- [ppp.] 'to congeal, become solid7 < *mrH-sk-, Gr. μωρός 'stupid, foolish'. Morari could be a denominal verb to mora, or it could represent an old iterative *morH-eie- as proposed by Schumacher. Incidentally, this would point to root-final *-h₂- If *wo- regularly became *ma- in open syllable, mora cannot regularly reflect

<!-- pdf-page: 403; printed-page-estimate: 389 -->

*mor- in open syllable. The vowel ο might have been restored in the iterative verb. One might with Schrijver 1991 posit *morH-, with the laryngeal closing the syllable in Pit - but see section 4.2, note 2, of the introduction. Bibl.: WHII: 110, EM 413, IEW 969f., Schrijver 1991: 110, Schumacher 2004:476.

morbus 'disease, illness' [m. o] (Lex XII+) Derivatives: morbidus 'sick' (Varro+), morbosus ' sickly' (Cato+); remorbescere 4to fall ill again' (Enn. apud Paul, ex F.). Pit *mor-foA PIE *mor-bho-? Morbus cannot continue an adj. in *-ic/O-3 such as acerbus 'sour', since *moripo- would normally yield *moridus. Thus, the suffix is more likely to be PIE *-bho-, which surfaces especially in "adjectives specifying something's appearance" (Nussbaum 1999a: 393, e.g. albus, sorbum). Morbus could be 'looking like death5 to the root *wr- of mors and monrl Morphologically, however, a PIE formation *m(o)r-bho- is somewhat strange. An alternative basis would be *mor-, *mor-, the (non-IE?) root of'bramble' (Gr. μόρον 'black mulberry', W, merwydden). Bibl.: WH II: 110f., EM 414, IEW 735-737, Leumann 1977: 330.

mordeo 'to bite' [v. II; pf. memordi, momordi, ppp. morsum] (Ph+) Derivatives: mordicus 'with^the teeth, by biting "(Naev.+), morsus, -us 'bite, wounding' (Cato+), mordox 'prone to bite, biting, sh^rp' (Pl.+), morsiuncula 'a little bite' (PL+); admordere 'to bite, extract money from' (Pl.+), praemordere 'to bite at/from the end' (Ph+)> remordere 'to bite back, gnaw' (Lucr.+). Pit» *mordreje-. PIE pr. *h₂mord-(e)ie- 'to crush, bite', pf. *h₂me-h₂mord-, ptc. *h₂mrd-to-, IE cognates: Skt. sam-marditoh [inf.] 'to crush', mfdila- 'smashed, crushed', OAv, mdrBfjdat (< *mr-n-dr) [3s.pnirij.act] 'to ruin, crush5, OP vimardatiy [pr.], viyamarda [ipf.] cto crush5; Gr. άμέρδω 'to deprive of, άμείρω (Pi.) 'to bereave', OE smeortan 'to hurt'. ; An iterative present (biting is typically a repeated action) with PIE o-grade. Apparently, the simple thematic present was ousted in Latin, Final *-rf might be a root enlargement if Gr, άμείρω is old (but it might be secondary after the aor. ήμερσα). Bibl.: WH II: 11 If., EM 414, IEW 735-737, Leumann 1977: 604, LIV *h₂merd-.

morior, mori 'to die' [v. III; ppp. mortuum] (Lex XII+; also (e)monn?\. Enn. Ter) Derivatives: common 'to die together with' (PL+), demon 'to die' (PL+), emon 'to perish, die out5 (Pl.+), intermori 'to perish, die off, praemorl 'to die beforehand' (Varro+), moribundus 'dying, decaying' (PL+); mors, -tis [f, i] 'death' (Naev.+)3 mortalis [adj.; m.] 'mortal, perishable; human being' (Naev.+), immortalis 4immortal, eternal* (PL+), immortalitas 'immortality, being a god' (PL+), morticinus 'that has died a natural death' (Pl.+X mortifer 'deadly' (Enn.+); mortuus 'dead, done with' (Naev.+)3 mortualia 'mourning garments, funeral dirges' (Naev.+), emortualis 'of one's death' (PL).

<!-- pdf-page: 404; printed-page-estimate: 390 -->

Pit. *morje- 'to die', *morto- 'dead', *mortwo- 'dead', *morti- 'death'. It. cognates: Ven. murtuvoi [dat.sg.] 'dead'. PIE *mr-ie/o- 4to die', *mr-to- 'dead', *mr-uo- Mead', *mr-ti- 'death'. IE cognates: Olr marb, W. marw 'dead' < *mfuo-; Hit. mer-zi/ 'to disappear, vanish' < *mer-/*mr-, marnuJl Ho make disappear'; Skt. pr. mriyate (< *mr-ie-\ aor. mar-/mf-9 pf. mamara, caus. marayati 'to kill', martave [inf.] 'to die', mrta- 'died, dead', a-mfta- (< *&-mrto-) 'immortal'; YAv. miriia- 'to die', mardta- 'died', omDsa- 'immortal'; Gr. (Hsch.) έμορτεν [3s.ipf.act] 'died', άμβροτος * immortal'; Arm. merani- 'to die'; Go. maurpr 'murder'; Lith. mirti 'to die', OCS mreti 'to die', ntbrtvb, Ru. mertvyj, SCr. mrtav 'dead'. MorticJnus might be based on an earlier adj. *mortiko-. The change of PIE *mfiuo- to *mftuuo- (conditioned by i?) was Pit. judging by Ven. murtuvo-. The formation of *mrtiio- Mead' for PIE *mfto- (as in Slavic) may be due to a contamination with *mruo- as attested in Celtic. Lat. (im)mortalis might be based on earlier *morto- 'dead' rather than on mors Meath'. Bibl.: WH II: 112f, EM 414f., IEW 735, Lejeune 1974: 337, Sihler 1995: 536, Meiser 1998: 93, Livingston 2004: 10, LIV *mer-.

mortarium 'bowl, mortar' [α ο] (Pl.+) Pit. *morto-l PIE *mr-to- 'crushed'? IE cognates: Hit. marriie/a-tia(r0 , marraiia{ri)- 'to melt (down), dissolve, boil' < *me/orH-je-; Skt. pr. pro ni mpnhi [2s.ipv.act-], mpya- 'to grab, crush', Gr. μάρναμαι 'to fight, battle', μαραίνω 'to quench, destroy', OIc. merja 'to hit, destroy'. Could be based on a Pit. form *mor-to- 'ground' < *mrto-, derived from the same root *wr- 'to disappear' as morior. We find the meaning 'to destroy' or 'to crush' in various IE words from *mrh₂-, which could be interpreted as a root extension *-h₂- to the root *mr-, Bibl.: WH II: 112, EM 415, IEW 735-737, LIV *merh₂-. -> morior

mos, mOris 'custom, usage' [m. r] (Naev.+) Derivatives: moratus 'endowed with certain manners' (PL+), morigerus 'compliant' (Naev.+), morigerare/i 'to be compliant' (Pl.+), morigeratio 'indulgence' (Afran.); mordsus 'hard to please' (Pl.+). Pit. *mos~. PIE *m(e)hr5s, -os- 'manner'. The meaning of mos is sufficiently close to 'measure' to derive it from PIE *mhr 'to measure'. In theory, alternative reconstructions would be *meh₃-os-, or a root noun *mos (cf. flos 'flower', mus 'mouse'). Bibl.: WH II: 113-115, EM 415f, IEW 704f, Schrijver 1991: 203. -> mensis, metior, mitis

moved 'to move (tr. and intr.)' [v. II; pf movi, ppp. mdtum] (PL+) Derivatives: motus, -us 'motion, movement' (Acc.+), momentum 'movement, power,

<!-- pdf-page: 405; printed-page-estimate: 391 -->

short period, event' (Ter.+), momen [n.] 'movement' (Lucr.+), mobilis 'quick in movement, movable' (PL+), mdbilitas 'quickness of movement' (Lucr.+); admovere 'to move near, apply' (Pl.+), amovere 'to remove, get rid of (Pl.+), commovere 'to stir up, agitate, rouse' (Pl.+), commotus, -us Movement' (Varro), demovere 'to divert, remove' (PL+), dimovere 'to cleave, part' (Lucr.+)> emovere 'to remove, expel' (Pl.+), obmovere 'to offer up' (Cato+), prdmovere 'to propel, push forward' (Ter.+), removere 'to remove, banish' (Pl.+), summovere 'to drive off, dispel, remove' (Pl.+), transmovere 'to transfer' (Ter+). Pit. *mow(a)- [aor.]. It. cognates: maybe U. comohota [ppp., abl.sg.f.] lkom(m)otal '?' < *kom-mow-e/i-to- 'moved', PIE *m(i)euhr [aor.] 'to move', IE cognates: Hit. mau- / mu-, mauss- 'to fall' < *mouhr / *muhr, mum(m)iia/e-zl <; *mumai- < *mh₁u-oi-; Skt. pr. -mfvanti- [ptc.actf.] 'pushing down', ps. -mivyamarja- [ptc.] (< PIE *mihru-), ° muta- (< *muhrto- < *miuhi-to-) in kama-muta- 'impelled by love\ Av. a-muiiamna- 'motionless', YAv. axma.mluua- 'to clear away', Khot mvlr- 'to move'; Littu maudyti 'to bathe', Latv. maut 'submerge, swim', maudat 'bathe' < *mouH-, OCS myti 'to wash' < *muHs ToB miw-, To A mew- 'to shake'.

Lat motus < ^mowe-to-, motus [m.] < *mowe-tu-y mobilis < *mowe-bli-, and momentum < *mowe-mnto- have restored *-owe- (as far as -e- was syncopated by rule) after the change of *-owV- > -ii- seen in riirsus, nundinae. In movere, mo- must be more recent than the change of *-cw- > *-aw-. Hence, we posit *meuH-, which could be the PIE root pr. or aorist. The suffix -e- could have been adopted from the old caus.pr. *maweje- < PIE *mouH-eie (cf. Vine 2006a), or from other stative presents in *-e-je-, Bibl.: WH II: 106, 116, EM 416f, IEW 743, Rasmussen 1989: 117, Schrijver 1991: 278-281, 448fi, Meiser 1998: 85, Untermann 2000: 416, Vine 2006a: 218-221, LIV *mieuh|-, —>suo

mox 'soon' [adv.] (Pl.+) Pit *moks(u)j_ PIE *moK(-)s(-) 'soon'. IE cognates: OIn mo [adv.}, mos- [prev.] 'soon', MW moch 'soon*; Skt. mak?ii 'quickly', OAv. mosuca 'and soon', YAv. mosu 'soon'. It is unclear whether the PIE word is an old loc.pl. in *-su9 or whether it contains a PIE w-stem. The root, too, is uncertain. In theory, Lat. mox and the Ilr. forms could be derived from *mog-s(-), ograde of the root *mg- 'great5 of magnus; the semantic development would have been '(in) much, many' > 'quick, soon'. Bibh: WH II: 117, EM 417, IEW 747.

mucrO 'point (of a sword, etc.)' [m. n] (Enn.+) Pit *m(e/o)uk-ro-l PIE *(h₂)muk-ro-. IE cognates: Gr. άμύσσω 'to scratch, tear', αμυχή 'rent, wound', αμυγμα 'rending'; άμυκάλαι 'arrow-tips', αμύσχεσθαι 'to scratch the flesh with one's nails' (Hsch.); Lith. musti, 3s. musa 'to beat', Latv. mustavas [nom.pl.] 'warping beam'.

<!-- pdf-page: 406; printed-page-estimate: 392 -->

The vowel length of mu- is disputed: the syllable is long in OLat poetry, which seems to point to mu j cro. The appurtenance of Lith. musti is uncertain, since the meaning is not 'to scratch'. Greek and Latin might go back to PIE (in which case Greek has some secondary consonant variation from an original stem *amuk-), or be borrowings from an unknown language. If mu- has a long vowel, the Latin form would reflect *me/oukrro-, Bibl.: WHII: 117, EM 417, IEW 745, Schrijver 1991: 21.

mucus 'mucus, snot' [m. ο] (Pl.+) Derivatives: mucere 'to be mouldy1 (Cato), mucidus 'snotty, mouldy' (PI.+); emungere (emunxi, emiinctum) 'to wipe one's nose; trick' (Pl.+); mugil(is) [m.] 'sea-fish, grey mullet' (Varro+). Pit *mung- 'to wipe\ PIE *(s)mu-n-k- 'to brush off, *(s)me/ouk-o- 'snot\ IE cognates: Skt. pr. muficami, mucyate, aor. amugdhvam [2p.med,ath.], amucat [3s.act.them.] 'to release, set free', YAv.fra-muxti- [f] 'binding loose (shoes)', paiti.smuxta- [adj.] 'wearing shoes', Gr. μύσσομαι 'to blow one's nose', μυκτήρ, -ήρος [m.] 'nostril', μύξα 'slime, mucus', μύξων [m.] 'kind of mullet'; Lith. maukti 'to pull, peel, skin', mukti, 3s. mioika 'to walk away', smukti 'to glide (off)', Po. smukac 'to brush', Ru. (dial.) smykat' 'to milk'; Cz. mknouti 'to move', SCr. maknuti 'move' < PS1. ^mtkngti. It is not certain that mungo and mucus belong to the same root. Mungo can be compared with the nasal presents in Skt. and BSL and with the meaning of Gr. μύσσομαι. Lat mucus would have to be an old derivative of the same root; but it can also belong to IE words for 'moist1, 'moor': Mir. mocht 'weak' < *muk-to-\ OIc. mjukr, Latv. mukls 'marshy'. Bibl.: WH I: 402£, EM 417,421, IEW 744£, LIV *meuk-.

mugiO, -ire 'to low, moo, bellow' [v. IV] (Varro+) Derivatives: muginarl 'to roar, hum and haw' (Lucil.+), mugilus, -lis 'lowing, roaring' (Varro+). Pit. *miig-. It cognates: maybe U. mugatu [3s.ipv.II], muietofust [3s.flit.pfps.] '?': mute- < *mug-je-7 PIE *mug-. IE cognates: Hit mugae-1 'to invoke, entreat', denom. to *muga- 'invocation of the gods through noise1 < *moug-o-, QX%mukar- I mukn- 'noisy instrument, rattle' < *meug-r, *mugnos; Gr. μΰκάομαι 'to low, bellow", μύζω 'to mutter, moan', Lith. mukiu, mukti 'bellow', Ru. mycat\ Ukr. mukaty, MHG miihen 'to low, bellow", OHG muckazzen 'to talk slowly*. Onomatopoeic form, imitation of a cow's lowing. Bibl.: WH II: 119f., EM 417f, IEW 75If., Untermann 2000: 480£ → mutus

mulceo 'to stroke, caress' [v. Π; pf. mulsi\ (Pl.+; in PI. only mulsus) Derivatives: demulcere 'to stroke, entrance' (Ter.+), permulcere 'to rub gently, soothe' (Pac,+); mulcdre 'to handle roughly, damage' (Pl.+). Pit *moIk~eje- 'to stroke, rub', *moIkra- 'stroke'?

<!-- pdf-page: 407; printed-page-estimate: 393 -->

PIE *m(o)lk-eie- 'to touch repeatedly'. IE cognates: Skt, pr. mfsase [2s.med.], s-aor. mj-k^ata, pf. mami$ur, caus. marsaya-; Sogd. mrws- 'to touch'. The verb mulcare can hardly be derived from *molk-eje^ so it may rather be denominal to a noun *molka-. LIV reconstructs initial *h₂- for PIE because of a possible connection with *h₂melg- 'to milk' (then *h₂ml-g/k-). This is possible, but unproven. Bibl.: WH II: 120f„ EM 418, IEW 724, Untermann 2000: 484, LIV *Hmellc-.

mulgeC 'to milk' [v. II; pf. mulsi, ppp. mulctum] (Cato+) Derivatives: immulgere 'to milk (into)' (Andr.+); promulgare 'to make widely known' (Cic.+); mulctra/-um [f./n.] 'milking-pail' (Verg.+). Pit. *molgeje-. PIE *h₂mlg-eie- 'to milk\ IE cognates: Olr. mligid* 'to milk' < PCI. *mlige/o- < *h₂mlg-; Gn άμέλγω 'to milk', Alb. mjel, Lith. melzu < *h₂melg-, OCS mltzg < *h₂mlg-, OHG melchan, OE melcan, ToA mdlkant (ptc). Originally a PIE iterative pr. 'to milk'; in view of the Olr. cognate, mulgeo most likely continues a zero grade of the root The verb promulgare can be interpreted as a factitive to mulgere: 'to milk forth' > 'make known'. Lat. mulctra was not based on the pr., but seems to continue an earlier *m(e/o)lg-tro- (cf. Serbat 1975: 313). Bibl.: WH II: 121, 370, EM 418, 538, IEW 722f, Schrijver 1991: 21, Schumacher 2004: 486, LIV *h₂melg-. : >

mulier, -eris 'woman' [f. r] (Lex XII, Andr.+) Derivatives: muliebris 'of a woman, female' (Pl.+), muliercula Mittle woman' (PL+), mulierosus * addicted to women' (PL+), mulierare 'to use as a woman' (Varro). Muliebris < *mulies-ri- proves an original s-stem. Thus, nom.sg. *mulies or *mulies » *mulier > mulier. The older etymology (Sommer 1914: 454, WH, IEW) interprets mulier as an original comparative to the stem of mollis 'soft, weak', namely as *mj-ies-i; more correct would be *m]d-ies-T, but this would yield *mollieri> *mullier with a palatal/. Klingenschmitt 1992: 130 proposes a comparative to the stem of melior 'better*: *mj-ies-iH 'the better one, chief spouse' > *moliesi » nom. *moliesis. This requires two more assumptions which are without a parallel: firstly, *olj > ulj. This is unlikely, since *y has turned to i in all of OLat. (mulier), whereas the change olC > ulC is dated to the second century BC (Meiser 1998: 84). Secondly, the nom. *moliesis would have analogically been remade into *molies/r, which is unlikely (cf. neptis). Hence, there is still the possibility that mulier has a different etymology. Bibl.: WH II: 122, EM 418f, IEW 716-719, Sihler 1995: 309f., Meiser 1998: 152. —* melior, multus

mulleus 'red-coloured (said of shoes)' [adj. o/a] (Cato+; mullos [acc.pl.] Vopiscus) Pit. */wo/wo. PIE *ml-uo-? IE cognates: Lith. mulvas 'reddish, yellowish'.

<!-- pdf-page: 408; printed-page-estimate: 394 -->

Driessen 2005: 45 holds that the original form may have been mullus (possibly retained by Vopiscus) which was remade into mulleus on the model of calceus 'shoe', with which it always occurs. Driessen rejects the connection with adj. in *-«o- meaning 'black' (e.g. Gr. μέλας, Latv. m$lns 'black') since Pit. *melano- would not yield Lat. mullus; he proposes *ml-uo- instead. Bibl.: WH II: 122f., EM 419, IEW 720f.

multus 'numerous, many' [adj. o/a] (Andr.+) Derivatives: multesimus 'infinitesimal' (Lucr,)> molta (CIL), multa 'penalty' (Pl.+)> multare (CIL moltare) 'to fine' (Naev.+)> multitare 'to fine habitually' (Cato), multitudo 'abundance, (large) number' (Varro+). Pit *molto-. It cognates: (λ molto [nom.sg.], moltam [acc.sg.], moltas [gen.sg. or acc.pl.], U, mutu, muta [nom.sg.], muta [acc.sg.], motar [gen.sg.] 'a fine'; O. multasikad [abLsg.f.j, moltas(ikud) [abl.sg.n.] * cashed as a fine', derivative in *-iko- of a form *moltasio- 'fine-like'; (λ moltaum [inf.] 'to fine'. PIE *m(o)l-to- 'good, big'? IE cognates: Gr. μάλα 'very, quite', μάλλον 'more, rather' (for * μέλλον?), μάλιστα 'mostly, quite especially'; Latv. milns 'very many\ The appurtenance of multa here is not certain, but can be justified: a fine is a 'quantity' one has to pay. Multus may formally be explained from *ml-to- or *mol-to- as 'good' or 'strong' vel sim., but the function of *-/o- remains unclear. As argued s.v. melior, the IE root etymology is not very strong. Bibl: WH II: 123-125, EM 419f, IEW 720, Untermann 2000: 482-484. -> melior

mulus 'mule' [m. ο] (Pl.+) Derivatives: mula 'she-mule' (Pl.+), mulid 'mule-driver' (Pl.+), muscella 'young she-mule'(CIL 4.2016), Pit. *musklo- / *mukslo-. IE cognates: Gr. μύκλος 'lascivious; pack-mule', μυχλός 'Phocaean name of a breeder-ass' (Hsch.) < *μυκσλός> Alb. mushk, ORu. mtskb, RuCS mesk 'mule'. Probably a loanword which entered Europe from Asia Minor in the form *musk- or *mwfa-, Bibl.: WH II: 125f., EM 420, Leumann 1977: 207.

mundus 'clean, elegant' [adj. ο/ά] (Pl.+) Derivatives: munditia "cleanliness, elegance' (PL+X mundulus 'elegant' (PL); immundus 'unclean, squalid' (PL+)> immunditia 'dirtiness' (PL+), permundus 'very clean' (Varro). Pit. *mudno-l PIE *mud-no- 'happy'? IE cognates: Skt. τηύώ [f.] 'joy, delight', moda- [m.] 'joy, delight', modate 'to be happy', Lith. mudriis, Latv. mudrs 'cheerful'? Could be derived from the PIE root *meud- 'to rejoice', although the semantics are not compelling. Bibl.: WH II: 126fi, EM 420, IEW 741-743.

<!-- pdf-page: 409; printed-page-estimate: 395 -->

mundus 'heavens, sky; world, earth; subterranean vault* [m. ο] (PL+) Derivatives: mundus [m.] 'a woman's toilet articles* (Acc.+). It is not certain that mundus 'sky, world' and mundus 'toiletry' are identical, but semantically, they seem close enough. A woman's toiletry can be interpreted as her 'equipment', which may be derived from 'world'. The Latin usage may have been influenced by Gr. κόσμος 'order; ornament, jewelry'. The etymology is unknown: the connection with Etruscan mund- cannot be established as long as its meaning is unknown. Bibl.:WHII: 127f.,EM420f.

munus, -eris 'function, task, duty' [n. r] (Pl.+) Derivatives: miinusculum 'small gift' (Pl.+), munerare 'to bestow' (PL+)> muneralis 'relating to the giving of presents' (PL+), munerigerulus 4bearer of presents' (PL); moe/unia, -drum 'duties, functions' (PL+); communis 'common, general' (Naev.+; OLat. comoin-X moe/unis 'obliged, indebted' (Pl.+), communitus [adv.] 'jointly' (Varro), communicare 'to share, communicate' (PL+); municeps, -ipis 'native, citizin of a municipium* (Lucil.+), municipium 'community, municipality' (CIL+), munificus 'dutiful, generous' (Pl.+), munificare 'to enrich' (Lucr.); immunis 'not paying a share, exempt' (PL+), Pit. *moini-, *moi-nos- [n«] 'duty, obligation, task'. It. cognates: O. muiniku, muinik. [nom.sg.f], muinikam [acc.sg.f], mumikad [abl.sg.f.], muini[kum] [nom.acc.sg.n.], muinikei [loc.sg,n.] 'common' < *mqin-iko-; U. muneklu [accsg.n.] 'contribution' < *moin-T-tlo-. PIE *h₂moi-no- [m. / adj.], *h₂moi-ni- 'exchange'? IE cognates: MW tramwy, tremynUy MCo. tremena, MBret. tremen cto cross, pass' < PCI. *tras-mi-nV~; Olr. main 'value, treasure', W. mwyn 'value', Skt. meni- 'revenge', YAv. maeini- [f.] 'punishment, castigation', OP yau-maini- 'power of revenge', Lith. mamas 'exchange', OCS mena 'exchange, substitution', Go. gamains 'common', OHG gimeins 'id.' <PIE *moino/hr.

All words are*based on two stems, *munos- and *muni- 'function, obligation'. A municeps is one who 'takes an obligation', communis 'who partakes in the duties'. The i-stem in the adj. could in theory have been created in Italic after adjectives such as inermis 'unarmed'; on the other hand, Gm. shows the same compound in Go. gamains. Munis can be a back-formation to communis. Probably Lat. munus is based on a thematic noun *moi-no-\ compare firms [n.] beside fenum. Vine 1999d: 300f. connects <meinom> on the Duenos inscription, reconstructing *mei-no- 'gift', which would occur in a figura etymologica with the verb form mitat on the same inscription. Bibl.: WH I: 254f., II: 128, EM 421 f, IEW 710, Schrijver 1991: 20, Meiser 1998: 59, Untermann 2000: 48Iff., Schumacher 2004: 485, LIV 2.*mek -> meo, migro, moenia, mutuus

murmur, -is 'low, continuous noise* [n. r] (Pac.+) Derivatives: murmurare 'to rumble, mutter, grumble' (Pl.+), commurmurare 'to mutter, murmur' (Varro+), murmurillare 'to mutter faintly' (PL), murmur ilium 'a

<!-- pdf-page: 410; printed-page-estimate: 396 -->

faint mutter' (PL). Pit. *mo/ur-mo/ur-a~. PIE *mr-mr-. IE cognates: SkL murtmra- [m.] 'crackling fire', -a [f.] name of a river, marmara- 'roaring', Gr. μορμύρω 'roar and boil', Arm. mrmr-am, -im (< *mufmuf-)9 Lith, murmitU murm{t)inti cto grumble, murmur', Cz. mrmrati, SCr. mrmraii, Bulg. marmorja 'id.' < PS1. ^mtrm^hjra^ Ru. mormulit* (dial.) 'grumble, chatter', SCr. mrmljiti 'to mumble, grumble' < PS1. *m*rm-l·; OHG murmulon 'id.'. Since murmur is attested later than murmurare, and since we find reduplicated verbs everywhere in IE, murmur may well be a deverbal derivative. Latin murmur- is regarded as a reflex of earlier *mormor- < PIE *mrmr- or *mormor- (the change of *mor- > mur- being irregular), but it may also have onomatopoeic *-w-. Bibl.: WH II: 130f., EM 423, IEW 748f, Meiser 1998: 63f.

murus 'defensive wair [m. o] (Pl.+; moerus /moirus CIL, Enn., Ace.) Derivatives: muralis 'of a wall; turreted' (Lucr.+), pomerium /pomoerium 'strip of land round the walls, town boundary* (VarroH-). Pit. *moi-ro~. PIE *(H)moi-ro- 'building'. Pomerium < *posmoirio- < *post-moirio- 'what is behind the wall'. It did not undergo the expected change of *oi to Γ in non-initial syllable; hence, it may be an archaism. Bibl.: WH II: 131f., 334, EM 423f., IEW 709, Meiser 1998: 71, 87, LIV 1 .*mei-. -> moenia

mus, muris 'mouse' [m. r] (Pl.+) Derivatives: muscipulum 'mousetrap' (Lucil.+), musculus 'mussel, small fish, small rodent; muscle' (Pl.+), murinus 'of a mouse' (Varro+), muscerdae [f-pl-] 'mouse droppings' (Plin.); possibly murex, -icis 'shellfish yielding purple dye; its shell' (Lucil.+); mustela / mustetta 'weasel; certain fish (prop, burbot)' (Pl.+), mustelinus 'of a weasel' (Ter>), mustricula *a shoemaker's last' (Afran. apud Paul. exF.). Pit. *mus 'mouse', *mus-tra- 'mouse-like animal'. PIE *muHs 'mouse'. IE cognates: Skt. mis- 'mouse, rat', YAv. mus- [f.j 'name of a Pairika\ Gr. μυς 'mouse', OHG mus\ OCS mysb, Sin. mis 'mouse' < PS1. *mysb; ToB mascitse* 'mouse, rat' < PTo. *mast'3tse < *m(w)asti- <*muHs-ti-> Since musculus also means 'mussel', it is conceivable that murex belongs here. It may also be a loanword, cognate with Gr. μύαξ 'mussel', Lat. musculus 'mussel' can be derived from 'mouse' (cf. musculus 'muscle', named after the form of a muscle), but may also be cognate with Gr. μύαξ and Lat. murex. The noun mustela is discussed elaborately by Schaffher 2006a, who holds that the original form of the noun was mustella from *mus-tre-la- 'small mouse-like animaF. He analyzes it as a diminutive of an earlier noun *mus-tra- 'mouse-like animal' which can be compared with OHG fledare-mustra 'bat' < PGm. *-mustro^ mtistro 'bat' < *mustran-. The preform *mtistro- is also found in Lat. mustricula < *mustro-ke-la- according to Schaffher, which would be due to the comparison of a shoemaker's last with the teeth of a

<!-- pdf-page: 411; printed-page-estimate: 397 -->

weasel. This seems convincing. The use of the dim, for the weasel can be due to its small size compared with other similar animals (marten, polecat) or because it was domesticated and used as a pet animal (Schaffiier 2006a: 39), Bibl.: WH II: 129, 132-135, EM 424f:, IEW 752f, Leumann 1977: 307, Schrijver 1991: 234, Meiser 1998: 57, Schaffiier 2006a. → -cerda

musca 'fly' [f, a] (PL+) Pit *musko/a-. PIE *mu-s-. IE cognates: Gr, μυΐα < *μυσ]α 'fly'; Arm, mown, Gen, mnoy 'mosquito', Alb, ntyze, mize\ OPr, muso, Lith, muse, muso, Latv, musa, musa 'fly'; OCS muxa, Ru, muxa, Cz, moucha 'fly' <*mousa, OCS mtsica 'mosquito, locust', Ru, (dial,) msica 'midge, gnats, small insects'; OIc, my [n,] < *muja- 'mosquito', OE rnycg, OS muggja, OHG mucka. Quite possibly an onomatopoeic form *mu for the humming sound which flies and mosquitoes make. The ^-extension is found in Latin, BSL, Greek and Gm, Bibl.: WH II: 133, EM 424, IEW 752,

muscus 'moss' [m, o] (Catcrt-) Derivatives: muscdsus 'mossy' (Varro+), Pit, *musL·-. > PIE *mus-ko- 'moor, moss'. IE cognates: Lith, musaf [m,J / musos [f.] 'mould', Ru. mox 'moss' [m,], ORu, mbxby moxt 'marsh overgrowp with moss', SCr, mah 'moss, mould, bloom' [m,], maha [gen,sg,] < BS1, *mus-o-\ OIc, mosi 'moss, moorland' [m,], OHG mos 'moss, marsh' [n,] < *mus-, OHG mios, OE meos 'moor, marshland', OIc, myrr [f J < *meus-. It is uncertain whether there is a connection with mustus, Bibl.: WH II: 134, EM 424, IEW 741-743,,

mustus 'fresh, young' [adj. o/a] (Naev.+) Derivatives: rhustum 'unfermented grape-juice, must' (Cato+), mustidentus 'full of unfermented wine' (PI.+), musteus 'fresh, juicy; kind of pear' (Cato+), mustarius 'used for must' (Cato), mustaceus 'cake made with must' (Cato+).

In theory, mustus may be derived from *mud-s-to- to the root *mud- 'to be cheerful', but the semantic connection is quite gratuitous, Bettini 2000 derives the name for the 'weasel' from mustus, via a dim, suffix -ella\ but see s,v, mus. Bibl.: WH II: 136, EM 425, IEW 741-743.

mutilus 'mutilated, truncated' [adj. o/a] (Varro+) Derivatives: mutilare 'to mutilate, cut ofP (Ter.+), admutilare 'to cut loose, fleece' (Pi.). IE cognates: Ir, mut, Gaelic mutach 'short' < *rnutl·. No etymology, Bibl.: WH II: 136, EM 425, IEW 753,

<!-- pdf-page: 412; printed-page-estimate: 398 -->

mQtO / rauttO 4penis' [m. ri\ (Lucil.+) Derivatives: mutd/unium 'penis' (Lucil.+), mu/oetinus 'phallic* (LuciL). Pit *muto-. PIE *mHu-to- 'strong one'. IE cognates: Olr. moth 'male organ'; Hit. muua- [c] an awe-inspiring quality (loanword from Luw.), CLuw. muua- 'to overpower (vel sim.)' (3sg.pr.act. mu-u-ua-i) (< *mouH-?)> HLuw. muwa- 'to dominate(?), to attack(?)', *^2muwita- [c] 'seed'(?), nimuwinza- [c] 'child', Lye. muwete- 'descendance?'; Hit. muri- 'bunch'; Gr. μϋρίος [adj.] 'countless, immense' < *muH-rik Since the penis is often referred to with euphemisms, one may derive mutd from the adj. mutus. On the other hand, one may also look for an external etymology. The closest comparandum of mutd seems to be Olr. moth. Applying the rules for pretonic absence of lengthening in Italo-Celtic sequences of the type *CHu- (Kortlandt 1980a, Schrijver 1991: 2485 534), we might explain moth < *mHu-to- while muto would be based on a form *mHu-to-. Weiss 1996a: 207-209 connects muto with Hit. muri- 4bunch' and muwa- 'awe-inspiring quality5, positing a PIE root *muh₁/3- 'reproductive power'. In view of the meaning of CLuw, muua- 'to overpower (vel sim.)' and Gr. μϋρίος 'countless' (connected by Weiss), the original meaning of the root may have been 'to be powerful / abundant'; the sexual connotation would then be specifically Italo-Celtic, or even older if HLuw. muwita- means 'seed' and belongs here, Bibl.:WHII:138,EM426.

mutus 'inarticulate, dumb' [adj. o/a] (Naev.+) Derivatives: obmutescere 'to become dumb, silent' (Ter.+); muttire 'to mutter' (Pl.+), muttitid 'muttering' (PL). Pit. *wto-. PIE *mu-to-. IE cognates: Skt. muka- 'dumb', muni- [m.] 'ascetic, hermit', Gr. μΰκός, μύτις, μυττός, μύδος, μυναρός, Hsch. μυνδός 'dumb, speechless', Arm. mownj 'dumb'. Mutus must be understood as 'he who cannot say anything but mu\ If we take muttire as a direct derivative of *muto- (with expressive gemination), both meanings 'to say muy and 'to be dumb' are represented. The root *mw is found with various extensions in the IE languages. Within Latin, we also find it in mugio. Bibl.: WHII: 139f., EM 426f, IEW 75If. → mugio

mutuus 'on loan, reciprocal' [adj. o/a] (Naev,+) Derivatives: mutuare/i 'to borrow' (Cato+), miituitarT 'to try to borrow' (PL), mutuiter 'reciprocally' (Varro); mutare 'to exchange, replace' (Pl.+), mutatio 'exchange, change' (PL+), mutabilitas 'liability to change' (Lucr.+), commutare 'to change, alter5 (PL+), commutabilis Variable' (Varro*), commutatio 'change, reversal' (Acc.+), commutatus, -its 'change' (Lucr.), commoetaculum 'kind of rod used during a ceremony' (Paul ex F\ demutare 'to transform, deviate' (PL+), immutare 'to alter, modify' (PL+), immutdbilis 'liable to be changed' (PL),permutare 'to exchange, sell' (PL+), transmutare 'to change into' (Lucr.+).

<!-- pdf-page: 413; printed-page-estimate: 399 -->

Pit *moito-, PIE *h₂moi-to- '(object of) change'. IE cognates: see s.v. munus. Both mutuus and mutare presuppose a nominal stem *muto- '(object of) change' [m.]. Several etymologies are possible for Pit. *moito~. It may be *moith₂-o- from the root *mith₂- *to exchange', or *h₂moi-to- from a different root for 'to exchange'. LIV favours the former option, but the meaning of mitto (the certain Latin reflex of *mith₂-) is much further removed from mutare than munus < *h₂mi- is. Bibl.: WH II: 137f„ 140, EM 426, IEW 715, Schrijver 1991: 20, LIV *meith₂-. -> med, mittd, munus
