---
title: The Indo-European Languages
author: Mate Kapović, editor
date: 2017
source_type: epub
extraction_date: 2026-05-07
source_file: kapović-ed-2017-ie-languages-2nd.epub
chunk: "Part 11, Chapter 1"
pages: "479-485"
---

<!-- page: 479 -->

# Chapter 1

# **Balto-Slavic**

*Steven Young*

The similarities in structure and lexicon, some quite striking, between the Baltic and Slavic branches of the Indo-European language family have long drawn scholarly attention. But the precise nature of the relationship between the two branches has been a source of debate for nearly as long. The prevailing view up to the early nineteenth century was that the Baltic languages were a kind of Slavic. It was through the work of the comparativists Franz Bopp and August Pott that Baltic was finally recognized as a language family in its own right (Petit 2004: 17–19). The classic presentation of Balto-Slavic as an intermediate branch of the Indo-European language family, with Baltic and Slavic as parallel sub-branches, is reflected in August Schleicher’s *Stammbaum*, or family-tree, approach, in which “slawolitauisch” (Balto-Slavic) develops from an earlier “slawodeutsch” (Petit 2004: 19–20). Comparative evidence for a Balto-Slavic grouping was later supplied by Karl Brugmann (1904: 18) in the form of eight shared innovations in phonology and morphology, among them the development of syllabic sonorants such as -*iR*-, the use of pronominal **-*yo- to form definite adjectives, and the replacement of the inherited genitive singular form of *o*-stem nouns by the ablative.

The first to offer a principled challenge to the neogrammarian tenet of a post-Indo-European period of Balto-Slavic common development was Antoine Meillet in 1908 (cf. 1967: 59–67).<sup>1</sup> In Meillet’s view, the various agreements between the two language families reflect either inherited Indo-European archaisms (with both Baltic and Slavic developing from nearly identical Indo-European dialects) or later parallel developments in each of the branches, rather than shared innovations that would demonstrate a stage of linguistic unity.

Jan Endzelin’s 1911 study of the agreements and differences between Baltic and Slavic represents an attempt to reconcile Meillet’s approach with that of the neogrammarians. While Endzelin agrees with a number of Brugmann’s shared innovations, adding to these syntactic comparisons (predicate instrumental and genitive direct object in a negated sentence) and a substantial number of exclusive lexical agreements, he accounts for these by positing a period of prolonged language contact between neighboring Baltic and Slavic communities, leading to a degree of linguistic convergence, particularly in the lexicon. According to Endzelin, while we can justifiably speak of a common Balto-Slavic period (“эпоха совместной жизни”: 202), this does not imply a Balto-Slavic protolanguage, reflecting a stage of complete linguistic identity.

Additional arguments, both in support of and against a period of Balto-Slavic linguistic unity, were put forward over the course of the twentieth century. Among the notable attempts in support of a “Sprachgemeinschaft” is Reinhold Trautmann’s 1923 *Baltisch-Slavisches Wörterbuch*, in which Baltic and Slavic lexical correspondences are systematized. A shortcoming of this work is the frequent inclusion of external cognates, and etyma that are represented in either Baltic or Slavic, but not in both (Petit 2004: 26).

<!-- page: 480 -->

A review of the accumulated evidence in support of the notion of Balto-Slavic can be found in Stang 1966 (17–21). Shared phonological innovations include the development of acute and circumflex tone on non-short syllables (*V̄*, *Vi*/*u*, *VR*): Lith. *kárvė* ‘cow’ : SCr. *krȁva* (reflex of acute tone), Lith. *saũsas* ‘dry’ : SCr. *sȗh* (reflex of circumflex tone); and the development of the syllabic sonorants *r̥, *l̥, *m̥, *n̥ into the sequences *ir*, *il*, *im*, *in*: Lith. *viršùs* ‘top’ : ORuss. *vьrxъ*, *vil̃kas* ‘wolf’ : OCS *vlьkъ* (*-ьl-), Lith. *dešim̃tas* ‘tenth’ : OCS *desętъ* (*-ьn-), OPruss. *insuwis* ‘tongue’ : OCS *językъ* (*ьn-) and (more controversially) after labiovelar stops into *ur*, *ul*, *um*, *un* (Vaillant 1950: 171): CS *gъ̋rdlo ‘throat’, Lith. *gurklỹs* ‘crop’ reflect a reduced grade *gur- to the ***gʷerh₃- of CS *žerti (OCS *požrěti* ‘to swallow, devour’), Lith. *gérti* ‘to drink’. Compare also the set OCS *gъnati* (reduced grade) ‘to chase’ : *ženǫ* (full grade) ‘(I) chase’ and OPruss. *guntwei* ‘to chase, drive’, *gunnimai* ‘(we) chase’ and Lith. *genù*, Latv. *dzȩnu* ‘(I) drive (cattle)’.<sup>2</sup>

To Stang’s examples of Balto-Slavic phonological innovations we can add the change of *e* to *o* before *u̯* when followed by a back vowel: Lith. *tãvas* ‘your’, Latv. *tavs*, compare Gr. τεός; OCS *novъ* ‘new’, compare Gr. νέος (Endzelin 1911: 84); the change of *-eu-* to *-i̯au-* (*-’au-*) before a consonant:<sup>3</sup> Lith. *liáudis* ‘people, nation’, Latv. *ļàudis* (nom. pl.) ‘people, folk’ : OCS *ljudьje* ‘people’ (*lewdʰ-); Lith. *liaupsė̃* (*lewbʰ-) ‘praise’ : OCS *ljuby* ‘love’.

Innovations in nominal derivation (see Stang 1966: 18) include deverbal abstract nouns in *ima-*: Lith. *piešìmas* ‘drawing’ : CS *pisьmo ‘writing’; abstract formations in **-*ī̆-b-: Lith. *draugýbė* ‘friendship’, Latv. *draudzība*: CS *družьba; agent nouns in *-ā-i̯o-*, *-ē-i̯o-*: Lith. *artójus* ‘plowman’, OPruss. *artoys*: OCS *ratajь*; Latv. *šuvẽja* (*si̯uu̯-ēi̯-) with an exact match in Russ. *швея́* ‘tailor’ (Endzelin 1952: 37); agent nouns in *-ik-o*: Lith. *siuvìkas*, OPruss. *schuwikis* ‘shoemaker’ : ORuss. *šьvьcь* ‘tailor, shoemaker’; the agentive suffix represented by dialectal and OLith. *inỹkas* (standard *-iniñkas*), CS *-ьnikъ: Lith. dial. *arklinỹkas* ‘stableman, groom’ : OCS *dlъžьnikъ* ‘debtor’; and the diminutive suffix *-īt(i)i̯o-: Lith. *sūnýtis* ‘son (dim.)’ : OCS *otročištь* ‘boy’.

This list can be supplemented by denominal adjectives in *-in-*: Lith. *krùvinas* ‘bloody’ : OSC *krъvьnъ* (Endzelin 1952: 38); diminutives in *-uk-o-*: Latv. *dȩ̄luks* ‘son (dim.)’, OCS *synъkъ*; masculine derivations in *-in-* such as Lith. *ãvinas* ‘ram’ (compare *avìs* ‘sheep’), Latv. dial. *avins*, OPruss. *awins*: OCS *ovьnъ*; and oblique cases of the first-person singular personal pronoun based on a stem *me/on-, generalized from the genitive stem: Lith. gen. *manę̃s*, dat. *mán*, acc. *manè*; Latv. gen. *manis*, dat. *man*, acc. *mani*; OPruss. dat. *mennei*: OCS gen. *mene*, ORuss. dat./loc. *mъně*; the reduced grade of the latter is matched by the dialectal (High) Latvian and Žemaitic Lithuanian dative *mun*.

Innovations in the inflectional and derivational morphology of the verb (Stang 1966: 18–19) include the *-ā* formant marking a preterit/aorist stem, often accompanied by the reduced grade of the root: Lith. *pir̃ko* (pres. *per̃ka*) ‘bought’ : OCS *žьda* (pres. *židetъ*) ‘waited, expected’; the Baltic preterit in **-*ē: Lith. *vẽdė* ‘led’, compared with the Slavic imperfect of the type *veděaxъ* ‘(I) led’; the verbal suffix Lith. *áujV-* compared with Slavic **-*űjV-, preterit Lith. *-ãvo* and Slavic *-ova*; and the distinctive formation of the present tense stem of ‘give’: OLith. *duosti* ‘gives’ : OCS *dastъ* (*dōd(ǝ)ti).

In addition, Baltic and Slavic share a large number of apparently exclusive lexical correspondences, which are not concentrated in any single semantic field. Wojciech Smoczyński (2001: 16–17), following Endzelin 1952 (44), finds at least two hundred, among them: Lith. *rankà* ‘hand’, Latv. *rùoka*: OCS *rǫka*;<sup>4</sup> Lith. *rãgas* ‘horn’, Latv. *rags*: OCS *rogъ*; Lith. *líepa* ‘linden’, Latv. *liẽpa*: OCS *lipa*; Lith. *lẽdas* ‘ice’ : OCS *ledъ*; Lith. *papartỹs* ‘fern’ : CS *paportь. These can be supplemented by the following comparisons from Endzelin 1952 (42ff.); Lith. *pìršys* (nom. pl.) ‘chest (of a horse)’ : OCS *prьsi* (*ьr-) ‘chest, bosom’; Lith. *síetas* ‘sieve’, Latv. *siêts*: SCr. *sȉto*; Lith. *míelas* ‘nice, sweet, dear’, Latv. *mĩļš* ‘sweet, dear’ : CS *mı̋lъ; Lith. *slánka* ‘woodcock’, Latv. *slùoka* (with anomalous tone) : Russ. *слу́ка*; and the precise correspondence sets Lith. *várna* ‘crow’, Latv. *vãrna*, OPruss. *warne*: CS *vőrna (whatever the interpretation of acute in this form may be) and Lith. *var̃nas* ‘raven’, OPruss. *warnis*: CS *vȏrnъ.

<!-- page: 481 -->

Finally, there are a number of prepositions and preverbs with close or identical correspondences in the two language families: Lith. *už* ‘at, within, instead of, in return for’, Latv. *uz* ‘on, to’: CS *vъz- ‘in return for, (preverb) up, back’; Lith. *priẽ* ‘at, with, to’, OPruss. *prei* ‘at, with, to’ : CS *pri ‘at, with, by’; Lith. *nuõ*, Latv. *nùo* ‘from’, OPruss. *no, na* ‘onto, against, over’ : CS *na ‘on(to), in(to)’; Lith. dial. and OLith. *iž* (standard *iš*), Latv. *iz* ‘out of’ : CS *jьz ‘from, out of’, with unexplained but matching initial *i-. A refinement of Balto-Slavic lexical comparisons, drawing on progress in dialectal data, can be found in Otkupščikov 1988.

Perhaps the most compelling argument for a Balto-Slavic protolanguage, demonstrated on the basis of shared innovations, is to be found in the highly complex prosodic structures of both language families,<sup>5</sup> which typically agree in accentual paradigms and lexical membership in these paradigms, stress placement (including the reflexes of Hirt’s Law), and phenomena associated with the rise of syllable tone (including the reflexes of Winter’s Law).

The classic statement of tonal correspondences between Baltic and Slavic is reflected in Stang 1966 (125). In this traditional view, the correspondence set conventionally labeled acute, continuing Indo-European length (including length from loss of a laryngeal), shows a rising pitch in Slavic, Old Prussian and (together with “broken” tone) Latvian, but a falling pitch in (standard) Lithuanian. On the other hand, circumflex tone has a falling pitch in the former, but a rising pitch in Lithuanian. Stang (1966: 125) assumes a shift in tonal contours (“eine Umlegung von Tonverlauf”) for Lithuanian. An attempt at resolving this anomaly is found in the work of Frederik Kortlandt (for example, 1985: 122ff.), who has argued that the various tonal contours are later developments in the individual languages, and that the broken-tone (glottalic) acute of Latvian and the Žemaitic dialects of Lithuanian is in fact the prosodic continuation of an earlier laryngeal. (Baltic) circumflex tone is simply the continuation of a non-laryngeal length (lengthened grade or vowel contraction).

An apparent lack of tonal correspondences between Baltic and Slavic can be found in stems belonging to the mobile accent paradigm (see below). Here the opposition of acute and (Balto-Slavic) circumflex was neutralized in Slavic; all such roots show “Slavic circumflex,” which continues in Serbo-Croatian as long falling tone: SCr. *gláva* ‘head’, acc. sg. *glȃvu* ≠ Lith. *galvà*, *gálvą*, Latv. *gal̂va*, with acute; SCr. *nȃg, nága* ‘naked’ ≠ Lith. *núogas*, Latv. *nuôgs*, with acute; SCr. *žı̑v*, *žíva* ‘alive’ ≠ Lith. *gývas*, Latv. *dzîvs*, with acute. This development, first described by Antoine Meillet (1902), is known as Meillet’s Law.

The set of Balto-Slavic acute stems of laryngeal origin is supplemented by the reflexes of Winter’s Law, which likewise serves as an important argument for a Balto-Slavic linguistic unity (Derksen 2004: 82). Werner Winter (1976) showed that there is a relationship between instances of Balto-Slavic lengthened vowels and the distribution of stem-final Indo-European aspirated and unaspirated voiced stops; an original short vowel followed by an aspirated stop remains short in Balto-Slavic, while an original short vowel followed by an Indo-European voiced stop shows a lengthened (acute) vowel:<sup>6</sup> BSl. *med ‘honey’ \< *medʰ, but *ēd ‘to eat’ \< *ed. Winter’s Law accounts for a number of cases that Stang had termed “theoretical metatony” (1970: 216), where the acute, rather than the expected circumflex (or short), occurs in a non-laryngeal base. The most comprehensive list of Balto-Slavic data supporting Winter’s Law is undoubtedly Dybo 2002.

<!-- page: 482 -->

Baltic and Slavic also agree in showing unexpected root stress in a number of bases that are oxytonic in Greek and Sanskrit: Lith. *dū́mai* ‘smoke’, Latv. *dũmi*, Slav. *dy̋mъ a.p. *(a)*, but Skr. *dhūmá-*, Gr. θῡμός; Latv. *grĩva* ‘mouth of a river’, CS *grı̋va a.p. *(a)* ‘mane’, but Skr. *grīvā́* ‘neck’; Lith. *pìlnas* ‘full’, Latv. *pil̃ns*, CS *pь̋lnъ a.p. *(a)*, but Skr. *pūrṅá-*; Latv. *diẽveris* (*deh₂iwer-) ‘husband’s brother’, SCr. *dȅvēr*, but Skr. (RV) *dēvā́* ‘(younger) brother of husband’, Gr. δᾱήρ \[*δαιϝήρ\] ‘husband’s brother’. This set of correspondences was first noted by Hermann Hirt (1892: 39), who characterized it (originally for Lithuanian) as “eine Akzentverschiebung bei den Worten mit gestossenem Vokal in der Stammsilbe …” ‘a stress shift in words with a broken (glottalic) vowel in the stem syllable’. This statement, known as Hirt’s Law, was revised in connection with laryngeal theory by V. M. Illič-Svityč (1963: 78–81); in Derksen’s updated formulation (2004: 84), “stress was retracted to an immediately preceding syllable containing a vocalic element followed by a laryngeal.” Note that this formulation excludes the sequence ***VRH-: CS *golvà ‘head’ and Lith. *galvà* preserve the final stress of ***golHu̯a̍H.

Baltic and Slavic also show agreement in accentual paradigms, the identity of which was established for nouns by Illič-Svityč (1963),<sup>7</sup> who derived the tripartite system established by Stang (1957) for Slavic<sup>8</sup> from its simpler Baltic counterpart (fixed-stress and mobile-stress paradigms). Illič-Svityč showed that Slavic accent paradigms *(a)* and *(b)* are in fact in complementary distribution and can be reduced to a single non-mobile paradigm, comparable to Baltic fixed stress. According to Illič-Svityč, stress is retained on an acute syllable (a.p. a), but advances from a non-acute (short or Balto-Slavic circumflex) syllable onto an immediately following syllable, resulting in a.p. b. Thus, while the root stress of the acute base Lith. *dū́mai* ‘smoke’ corresponds to that of SCr. *dȉm* (a.p. a), the root stress of the short base Lith. *blùsą* ‘flea, acc. sg.’, is matched by end stress in Russ. *блоху́* (a.p. b). Aside from the Slavic metatony associated with Meillet’s Law, Baltic and Slavic mobile bases retain their correspondence: Lith. *galvà* ~ *gálvą* ‘head, nom. sg. ~ acc. sg.’ (mobile a.p.) : Russ. *голова́* ~ *го́лову* ‘head, nom. sg. ~ acc. sg.’ (a.p. c).

The Baltic bipartite paradigmatic accentual system (fixed and mobile) thus represents an earlier state from which the Slavic system can be derived. The assignment of a particular word to either the fixed or mobile class is, in Balto-Slavic terms, unmotivated. According to Vladimir Dybo (especially 1980: 147–150), the two accent classes result from a phonologization of earlier sequences of morphemes of either “dominant” or “recessive” valencies, making up a word form or phonetic word, with a “contour rule” according to which word stress falls on the first morpheme of dominant valency. If a word form (or phonetic word) consists only of recessive morphemes, the initial morpheme is automatically stressed. The valencies in this approach are seen as continuing a tonal opposition (high and low tone) inherited from Indo-European.

The derivation of the Slavic accentual model from an earlier Baltic model, noted above, suggests a lack of equivalence between the notions of Baltic and Slavic. Developing a point originally made by Endzelin (1911: 201–202), Stang (1966: 10ff.) notes that while Common Slavic presents a relatively monolithic system, Baltic is divided by a number of significant isoglosses, complicating the notion of Proto-Baltic. Certain of these isoglosses connect East Baltic (Lithuanian and Latvian) with a uniform Slavic, while others connect West Baltic (Old Prussian) with Slavic. The former include the Indo-European genitive singular **-*s(y)o of *o-*stem nouns, apparently preserved in Old Prussian (*deiwas* ‘God, gen. sg.’, and the pronominal *stesse* ‘that, gen. sg.’; cf. Slavic *česo* ‘what, gen. sg.’), but replaced in East Baltic and in Slavic by a form that has ablative function outside of Balto-Slavic: Lith. *rãgo* ‘horn, gen. sg.’, Latv. *raga* = OCS *roga* (East Baltic has extended this to the pronominal system as well: Lith. – *kõ* ‘who, what, gen. sg.’, *tõ* ‘that, gen. sg.’); a present passive participle in *-m-* shared by East Baltic and Slavic (Lith. *vẽdamas* ‘being led’, Latv. *vȩdams*: OCS *vedomъ*), while Old Prussian continues an inherited *manas* (in the hapax *poklausīmanas* ‘being heard’); East Baltic and Slavic pronouns have *-m-* in the dative and locative singular, while Old Prussian continues inherited *-sm-* (Lith. *tãm(ui)* ‘that, dat. sg.’, Slav. *tomu*; OPruss. *stesmu*); Lith. *devynì* ‘nine’, Latv. *deviņi*, Slav. *devętь*, with an innovative *d-*, while OPruss. *newīnts* ‘ninth’ preserves inherited *n*. Finally, the word for ‘third’ reflects a stem *tret- in Lith. *trẽčias*, Latv. *trešs*, OCS *tretьjь*, while OPruss. *tīrts* agrees with Skr. *tr̥tíyaḥ*.

<!-- page: 483 -->

Isoglosses that link Old Prussian with Slavic include the possessive pronouns OPruss. *mais*, *twais*, *swais* ‘my, your, one’s own’, which agree with OCS *mojь*, *tvojь*, *svojь*, as opposed to Lith. *(manas)*, *tavas*, *savas* and Latvian *(mans)*, *tavs*, *savs*; the dative singular of the second person and reflexive pronouns preserves *-bʰ- in Old Prussian (*tebbei*, *sebbei*) and Slavic (*tebě*, *sebě*) (Stang 1966: 248; Lithuanian and Latvian have rebuilt these forms: Lith. *táu*, *sáu*, Latv. *tev*, *sev*); the Old Prussian preterit of ‘to be’, *bēi*, *be* agrees with Slav. *běxъ*, *bě*, as opposed to the preterit stem *bi- found in Latv. dial. *biju* ‘(I) was’ and OLith. *bit(i)*; and the nasal-infixed Old Prussian participial forms *sindats* and *syndens* ‘sitting’ (Catechisms I and II) can be compared with the infixed CS *sęd- ‘sit’.

These isoglosses suggest a greater time depth for Common Baltic, “if indeed such a unified protolanguage ever was a reality” (Birnbaum 1970: 70–71). The resulting lack of equivalence between the notions of Baltic and Slavic (and the associated limitations of the family-tree model) is particularly emphasized by V. V. Ivanov and V. N. Toporov (1961). In reviewing the methodological preconditions for discussing the Balto-Slavic relationship, they argue that a relatively homogeneous Proto-Slavic can be derived from a considerably more archaic and heterogeneous Proto-Baltic linguistic model, in effect redefining the notion of Balto-Slavic by treating Slavic as a local development within a Baltic dialectal continuum.

Among more distant post-Indo-European linguistic affinities proposed for Balto-Slavic, correspondences with Germanic have been noted since Schleicher’s time (recall his “slawodeutsch”). These include the marking of middle-intransitive voice through nasal infixation (a process that enjoyed particular productivity in Baltic) or nasal suffixation; the spread of the adjectival suffix *-isko- in a common function: Goth. *-isks*, OCS *ьskъ*, Lith. -*iškas* (Stang 1942: 275–278); and case forms in -*m-* that correspond to *-bʰ- elsewhere (for example, OLith. dat. pl. *-mus* (modern *-ms*), OCS *mъ*, Goth. *-m*, as opposed to Skr. *-bhyaḥ*, Lat. *-bus*: Meillet 1967: 148–152). Also characteristic are exclusive lexical agreements (Stang 1972: 79–82) across a number of semantic fields, including social relations: Lith. *draũgas* ‘friend’, Latv. *dràugs*, OCS *drugъ*, Goth. *driugan* ‘to perform military service’; Lith. *liáudis* ‘people, nation’, OCS *ljudьje* ‘people’, OHG *liut*; Lith. *valdýti* ‘to govern, rule’ (3 pres. *val̃do*), OCS *vladěti* ‘rule’, Goth. *waldan* \|\| technical culture (simple tools, materials, handicrafts, objects of daily life): Lith. *aldijà* ‘dugout canoe’, OCS *aldii*, *ladii* ‘boat’, Norw. dial. *olda* ‘large trough, often from a carved-out tree trunk’; OPruss. *dalptan* ‘punch (tool)’, RussCS *dlato* ‘chisel’, Russ. *долбить* ‘to chisel’, OEng. *delfan* ‘to dig, delve’; Lith. *strėlė̃*, *strėlà* ‘arrow, shaft’, Latv. *strȩ̄la* ‘stripe, streak; jib, crane’, OCS *strěla* ‘arrow’, OHG *strâla*, OEng. *strǣl* ‘arrow’ \|\| products: Lith. *vãškas* ‘wax’, OCS *voskъ*, OEng. *weax*; Lith. *alùs* ‘beer’, ORuss., RussCS *olъ* ‘an intoxicating drink’, Sln. *ǫ̑l* ‘beer’, ONor. *ǫl* ‘beer’ \|\| agricultural terms: Lith. *rugiaĩ* ‘rye’, OCS *rъžь*, ONor. *rugr* (*i*stem) \|\| certain adjectives: Lith. *sūrùs* ‘salty’, OCS *syrъ* ‘damp, moist’, ONor. *súrr* ‘sour’; Lith. *tingùs* ‘lazy, sluggish’, OCS *tęžьkъ* ‘heavy, difficult’, ONor. *þungr* ‘heavy’ \|\| numbers: OPruss. *tūsimtons* ‘thousand’, Lith. *tū́kstantis*, OCS *tysęšti*, *tysǫšti*, Goth. *þusundi* (which do not fully agree in formation). Stang (1942: 278) suggests that these equivalences reflect a common preservation of inherited (perhaps northwest Indo-European) features, or represent convergent developments, and thus belong rather to the realm of Sprachbund phenomena.

## **Further reading**

Henrik Birnbaum (1970) offers a balanced summary of various approaches to Balto-Slavic. Daniel Petit (2004) presents a historically oriented account of the Balto-Slavic question, from the Renaissance to the present day; he includes the findings of archaeology and provides an extensive list of references. Accentological issues are addressed by Rick Derksen (2004) in the same volume; an up-to-date overview of Balto-Slavic accentology can be found in the introduction to Derksen 2015. For a detailed presentation and evaluation of the data relating to Balto-Slavic, the careful and cautious studies of Christian S. Stang found in the references have not lost their relevance.


## **Notes**

<span class="label">1</span>Baudouin de Courtenay (1903: 330–331) had earlier rejected a Balto-Slavic unity, calling it a “scholarly fiction” (учёная фикция), but without providing argumentation.

<!-- page: 484 -->

<span class="label">2</span> There are disagreements regarding the -*uR-* reflex of syllabic sonorants after labiovelars as a regular phonological change; see the discussion in Stang 1966 (77–82). Still, the fact of specific Baltic and Slavic agreements in the roots for ‘chase, drive’ and ‘drink, swallow’ is revealing. The *-i-* (rather than *u-*) of Lith. *gìrtas* ‘drunk’, and the infinitives Lith. *giñti* ‘to drive (cattle)’, Latv. *dzìt*, is due to an extension of the productive ablaut pattern.

<span class="label">3</span>Derksen (2010) notes that this change was not shared by Old Prussian. But this argument depends on one’s interpretation of the orthographic evidence of the Old Prussian texts; see, for example, Schmalstieg 1976: 120.

<span class="label">4</span>Baltic characteristically preserves the original verbal root here, lacking in Slavic: Lith. *riñkti* ‘gather’ (3 pres. *reñka*), OPruss. *senrīnka*.

<span class="label">5</span>The role of accentology in the Balto-Slavic question was anticipated by Endzelin as early as 1911 (202): “дальнѣйшая разработка ударенiя …, вѣроятно, еще болѣе освѣтитъ этотъ вопросъ” (further developments in stress … will undoubtedly shed more light on the issue).

<span class="label">6</span>There are a number of interpretations of Winter’s Law and its conditions of operation; for a review and critique of the literature, see Derksen 2002. Kortlandt (1988: 387) amends “lengthened vowels” in Winter’s original statement to “acute vowels,” since he rejects a connection between (non-laryngeal) length and acute tone. In Kortlandt’s view, Winter’s Law represents “the merger of the glottal element of the preglottalized voiced stop with the reflex of the Indo-European laryngeals, which had become a glottal stop in Balto-Slavic” (Derksen 2004: 83).

<span class="label">7</span>This progressive stress shift was demonstrated for Slavic verbs at approximately the same time by V. A. Dybo (1962), and is therefore referred to as either the Law of Illič-Svityč or Dybo’s Law.

<span class="label">8</span>Accentual paradigm (a.p.) a is characterized by columnar barytonic stress; a.p. b by columnar oxytonic stress; and a.p. c by final-initial mobile stress, which is compared with the oxytona of Greek and Vedic in thematic stems.
