---
title: "Handbook of Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics, Volume 1"
author: "Jared Klein, Brian Joseph, Matthias Fritz (eds.); in cooperation with Mark Wenthe"
date: "2017"
source_type: epub
extraction_date: 2026-05-07
source_file: "978-3-11-039324-8.epub.zip"
chunk: "36. The lexicon of Iranian"
pages: "unknown"
---

# 36. The lexicon of Iranian

- 1. Introduction
- 2. Sky, celestial elements, and atmospheric processes
- 3. Earth, physical and chemical elements
- 4. Animate nature
- 5. Biological life, life functions, everyday life
- 6. Personal and family life
- 7. Abbreviations
- 8. References

## 1. Introduction

This article provides an account of the inherited PIE and PIIr. nominal lexicon in PIr. as well as of common Iranian lexemes reaching beyond the borders of the individual Iranian branches and languages. It is based on the lexical database of the present author’s *Etymological Dictionary of the Iranian Noun* (Sadovski, To appear₁), a component of the *Leiden Indo-European Etymological Dictionary Series* (*LIEEDS*), as well as on a parallel study of the development of the inherited lexicon, phraseology and (appellative and onomastic) compounds (based on inherited syntagms and formulae) from PIIr. to Iranian (Sadovski, To appear₂).

The present treatment concentrates on the inherited vocabulary of the different periods (PIE; PIIr., PIr. or common Iranian) subdivided according to word-fields of interest for lexico-semantic typology and language reconstruction and taking into account semantic change such as metaphoric shifts of meaning between word-fields. Collections of material that are now in print include (etymological) dictionaries such as Cheung (2007), Schmitt (2014), Rastorgueva and Ėdel’man (2000−2007), and Ėdel’man (2011−2015). Important for Proto-Iranian are also Mayrhofer (1986−2001) and Mayrhofer (2005), as well as lexicological bibliographies such as Heidermanns (2005) and Mayrhofer in Gouws et al. (2008−2013), classics such as Bartholomae ([1904] 1979), Abaev ([1958− 1989] 1996), and the four main compendia on Iranian languages: Schmitt (1989), Windfuhr (2009), Rastorgueva (1981−1991) (continued as Efimov 1997−2008), and Geiger and Kuhn ([1895−1901] 1974a, [1898−1901] 1974b). Also important are the historically oriented glossaries of individual Iranian languages and texts. For OIr. these include, above all, Kellens and Pirart (1988−1991: 2, 195−333), Hintze (1994: 401−470, 2007: 327−367), as well as Kent (1953: 164−215) and Brandenstein and Mayrhofer (1964: 99−157). The MIr. material, if not otherwise indicated, is prevailingly based on the following sources: for MPers., the lexicographical corpora of MacKenzie ([1971] 1990) and Durkin-Meisterernst (2004) (also Nyberg 1974: vol. 2 and Back 1978; on the problematics of a dictionary of MPers., cf. Shaked 2002) as well as the grammar of Durkin-Meisterernst (2014); for Khotanese, Bailey (1979) and Emmerick and Skjærvø (1982− 1997); for Scythian, Mayrhofer (2006); for Alanic, Lubotsky (2015); for Bactrian, Davary (1982), Sims-Williams (2000−2007, 2010), cf. also Humbach (1966−1967); for Chwaresmian, Benzing and Taraf (1983), Samadi (1986), and MacKenzie (1999); for Sogdian, Gharib (1995), Lurje (2010), Yakubovič (2013), and especially Sims-Williams and Durkin-Meisterernst (2012) and Sims-Williams (2016a, 2016b). The last decades have showed an increasing lexicological and etymological activity in the field of NIr. (cf. now the surveys in Tremblay 2005b, 2008, 2009 and in Kümmel, To appear₁, 72 f. with useful lists of lexical reconstructions pp. 86−102, to which also the present work explicitly refers for NIr.). For Baloči, issues of etymology are discussed in several works by Agnes Korn (e.g. 2003, 2005, 2006, and 2009), cf. also Morgenstierne (1932); on the local variants in Oman, see Collett (1983), on those of Marw, Elfenbein (1983). A comprehensive dictionary, edited by Adriano V. Rossi and Ela Filippone, is in preparation at L’Orientale University of Naples in co-operation with the Balochi Academy in Quetta, Pakistan; and a series of relevant articles has appeared in the (*Newsletter of*) *Balochistan Studies*. Completely differently organized is Mahmoodzahi (1991). For Ossetic, beside the classical study Hübschmann ([1887] 1969) and the fundamental dictionary Abaev (1996) (to be used together with Abaev 1997), cf. Kozyreva (1962), Bielmeier (1977), Abaev (1997), and the etymological annex to Cheung (2002: 148−255) as well as the posthumous magnum opus of Thordarson (2009); on lexical archaisms, cf. also Gershevitch (1952 [= 1985: 114−126]). For Pašṭō, see the new edition (Morgenstierne 2003) of the classical etymologicon Morgenstierne (1927) by Elfenbein, MacKenzie and Sims-Williams (reviews: Cheung 2005 and Tremblay 2005a); of historical value is Geiger (1893); De Chiara (2008) corrects a series of etymologies displayed in these works and offers new ones. The main dictionary of Waxī is Steblin-Kamenskij (1999). For the Pamir languages, beside the new edition Morgenstierne (1974), we have lots of new material, especially on Šughnī, in Karamšoev (1988−2005); on Parāči, in Kieffer (1979, 1980). Kurdish in its variants is etymologically documented by Cabolov (2001); on individual word-families, cf. Kurdoev (1960) and Kurdoev and Jusupova (1983 on Soranī), Omar (1992 on Kurmancī), and Karimi Doostan (1990 on the Badra dialect); cf. also Gülensoy (1994); historically relevant is Houtum-Schindler (1884−1888). For NPers., beside traditional interpretations of inherited and foreign words in historically oriented dictionaries or thesauri − above all, Dehxodā (1946−1981) and Steingass ([1892] 1963) − there are the still very useful aperçus of (the pre-Islamic revolution) NPers. lexicon in Lambton ([1954] 1988) and Pejsikov (1975), and, with a focus on modernization of vocabulary in the late 19ᵗʰ and early 20ᵗʰ century, Belgorodskij (1936), Hinz (1937), and Lescot (1939); for Tajikī: Rosenfeld (1961); of historical value are the (antiquated) classical etymologica of NPers. Horn ([1893] 1988; to be read together with Hübschmann 1895) and Vullers ([1855−1867] 1962), whose volume III is dedicated to word-families in Persian and beyond.

Beside the “straight” etymological dictionaries, an important source for lexicological and derivational studies is the reverse dictionaries. For OIr., see now especially Schmitt (2014: 297−328; important predecessors for OPers. are Pohl 1975 and Hinz 1975: 281− 299, cf. Hinz 1942: 155−160); for O/YAv. see Bartholomae (1979: 1901−2000); for ManMPers. and ManParth., R. Zwanziger in Boyce 1977: 107−172; limited to the latter’s “Word-List”). For NPers., Majidi (1995) is an excellent research instrument with relevance to word formation. On the history of classical Modern Persian lexicography, cf. now Baevskij (2007), an updated version of the Russian edition (Baevskij 1989 revised by Perry); with regard also to the modern period, cf. Moayyad (1962); on Ossetic lexicography, cf. Kozyreva (1964).

For the etymological reconstructions of PIr., this account uses several special characters based mainly on (phonetic) values used by the IPA and thus differing from the traditional designations of the PIr. phonemes concerned − *ʦ* instead of *ć*, *ʧ* instead of *č*, *ʣ* instead of *ȷ́*, *ʤ* instead of *ȷˇ*. The reason for this is the desire to avoid phonologically ambivalent graphemes (which, moreover, have sometimes varied in the history of scholarship) or which may be too overtly homographic with characters used for representation of PIIr. (whose phonemic or phonetic values are not necessarily identical with the ones presumed for PIr.). The present author is largely skeptical both about the universal taxonomical applicability of pre-defined, hierarchical conceptual systems and of the compatibility of such taxonomies (almost exclusively structured on modern cognitive categories) with the notional worlds of speakers of ancient language stages. Still, for purposes of presentation of the Ir. word material, we employ a combination of three widely-used conceptual systems: that of Hallig − Wartburg (1963; and its modified version applied in the *Französisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch*), the one of Dornsieff (⁸2004, originally prepared for but not applied in the project of a Greek thesaurus based on Liddell −Scott), and that of Roget (Kipfer 2005). For the history and the constraints of these systems, cf. Büchi (1996) and Sadovski (To appear₂).

We proceed now to the material of this study of the inherited Iranian nominal lexicon according to semantic word-fields.

## 2. Sky, celestial elements, and atmospheric processes

2.1. Inherited lexemes for ‘sky and celestial bodies’ logically also designate heaven and various celestial divinities of both the Indo-Iranian and the Mazdean(-Zoroastrian) pantheons. In Iranian, the word for ‘sky, heaven’, Ir. ****aʦman-***, functioning especially as a sacred [loan-]word (cf. Schmitt 2014: 139 f.) and prominent also as ‘stone’, has replaced PIE ****di̯u-***: YAv. *asman-*, OPers. *asmān-*, Parth. *ʾ(ʾ)smʾn* āsmān, Sogd. *ʾsmʾn* smān. The inherited designation for ‘star’ is ****stār-***, ***star-***, ***stər-***: OAv. *star-*: *strə̄m*, YAv. *star-*: *stārəm* and, as is often the case in Iranian, has beside it a derivative, ****stāraka-***, in the same value: MPers. *stʾlk*, *ʿstʾrg* stārag; Parth. *ʾstʾrg*; Sogd. *ʾstʾrʾk*, *ʾstry*; NPers. *sitāraʰ*. Similar to the differentiation in Ved. between *súvar* ‘sunlight’ and its derivative *sū́rᵢya-*as name of the sun-god (EWA, s.vv.), in Iranian we find the broader concept ****súu̯ar***, ***suu̯án-*** ‘sunlight’, in OAv. *huuarə̄, xᵛə̄ṇg*; YAv. *huuarə*; MPers. *hwl*, *xwr* xwar, and ‘sun’, especially in lexical compounds like ****suu̯ar-(x)šai̯ta-*** YAv. *huuarə*.*šaēta*- ‘(the) sunlight-bright (one); sun’; MPers. *xwaršēd*; NPers. *xuršēd* as well as in PN compounds like **Huu̯ar-dāta*-, **Huu̯ar-farnah*-, **Huu̯ar-pāta*- (Zadok 2009). A derivative ****suu̯aru̯āh***, ***suu̯aru̯ant-*** ‘with sunlight, sun’ is seen in Digor *xor*, Iron *xur*. Of special relevance is the presence of the celestial elements as divine protectors of the individual days of the month in the Zoroastrian calendar (Schmitt 2000), seen particularly in PNs. Cf. the inherited word for ‘moon’: ****mānas-***, ***maas-*** YAv. *mā̊ŋhəm*, MPers. *mʾh* māh, Parth. *mʾh*, NPers. *māh ~ māng*, and the derivative ****maasi̯ā-*** Digor *mæjæ*, Iron *mæj*. As a compositional term, we find it in PNs of the meaning ‘protected/given by the moon(-god)’, e.g. **Māh(i)-pāta*- or **Māhi-dāta-*. Still more complex is the transfer of the designation of the social ‘contract’ and the corresponding IIr. deity *Miθra* to the domain ‘sun’ and thus also to the calendar. PIr. ****miθra-*** YAv. *miθra*-; OPers. *miça*-; Sogd. *myδr*-, *myš*-; Bactr. *μιυρο*; Yidgha *m’īra* is attested in a series of theophoric and calendar-related names such as OPers. **Miça-pāta*-, cf. Schmitt (1978, 2000), Zadok (2009: 360 ff.).

2.2. Lexemes belonging to the semantic field ‘atmosphere and weather processes’ similarly designate also notions of mythology and (mythical) cosmology: so ****u̯āi̯u- ~ u̯āi̯āu̯-***‘wind/Wind’ YAv. *vaiiō*, *vaiiuš*; Waxi *wüy*, especially as a divine name **u̯āi̯u-* is present also as (first) term in theophoric and calendar-related PNs such as **Vāyu-kr̥ta-*. The appellative ****u̯āta-*** ‘wind’ YAv. *vāta*-; MPers. *wʾt*, *wʾd*; Sogd. *wʾt* wāt; Khotan. *bātä*; NPers. *bād* is largely used both in direct and metaphoric value, also in PNs such as **Vatāspa*- ‘whose horse(s) is/are (like) the wind’. Further common Iranian lexemes of this semantic sphere are ‘air’: ****antaru̯āʣa-*** MPers. *ʾndrwʾd* andarwād, *ʾndrwʾz* andarwāz, Parth. *ʾndrwʾz* andarwāz and ‘storm’: ****branθi-*** Khotan. *branthä*, *brīnthu*; *brīnthä*. Of IIr. origin is ‘cloud; sky’: ****abra-*** YAv. *aβra*-; OPers. **abra*- (also in compound PNs like **Abra-dāta-* and **Abra-kāma-*); MPers. *ʾbl*, *ʾp̄l* abr; NPers. *abr*; Bal. *haur*, *hawar* and ‘cloud’, with the connotation of ‘wetness, humidity’: ****mai̯ga-***, ***mai̯gā-*** YAv. *maēɣa*-,MPers. *mēɣ*, Parth. *myg*, NPers. *mēɣ*. The IE word for ‘cloud/heaven’ remains in Iranian in the sense of ‘humidity’: ****nabas-*** OAv. *nabåsca*; Pṣ̌t. *naw*; Yidgha *nīv*, *novo*, cf. ‘damp, humid’: ****nafta-*** MPers. *npt* naft, NPers. *naft*, also ***naftaka-*** BuddhSogd. *nβtʾk*, *nβtcʾ(h)*; ManSogd. *nβtyy* navdē. The words for various weather processes reach back to PIE, e.g. in the case of the word-family ‘snow’: ****snai̯xr-*** MPers. *snyhl* snēxr. From the same root for ‘to (fall and) stick’ (Hoffmann 1965), we have ****sniga-*/*snai̯ga-*** Šuγn. *žiniǰ*, Xufi *žinīǰ*, Bartangī *žinīǰ*; suffixed: ****snai̯ʤaka-*** MPers. *snyck* snēzag. Of shared heritage between OInd. and OIr. is the word for ‘hail’: ****ʣrādunī-*** OPers. **drādunī*-; Sogd. *ẓyδn*; Baškardī *dərāyén*, *drāʾen*. A specific Iranian term for ‘hail’ is also ****fi̯asu-*** YAv. *fiiaŋhumca*, the verb ‘to hail’ being **fi̯asu̯a-* YAv. *⁺fiiaŋhuṇtaēca*. Another conceptual group exhibits (PIr.) specializations of meaning, as in the case of the original ‘rain’-word: ****u̯āra-*** Waxi *wür*, ****u̯afrā˘-*** ‘snow; cold’: YAv. *vafra*; MPers. *wpl*, *wpr* wafr; Parth. *wfr*; KurdSor. *wafer*; Yaghn. *waf(i)r*; Pṣ̌t. *w’āwra*; ****mai̯θa-*** ‘snow’: Digor *met*, Iron *mit*; and ****iʦu-*/*isʦu-*** ‘icy’: YAv. *isu*- and ****iʦuka-*** ‘frost’: Pṣ̌t. *as’ay*.

## 3. Earth, physical and chemical elements

3.1. Among the lexemes designating ‘earth forms, shapes, and configurations’, PIr. inherited the most important IE words for ‘earth’: (1) ****ʣam-***, ***ʣā-***, ***ʣm-*** YAv. *zā̊*, *ząm*, *zəm*-, *zəmi*, developing derivatives such as ****ʣamīkā-*** Bactr. *ζαμιγο*, *ζαμιιο*; MPers. *zmyk*, *zmyg*, *zmyq* zamīg, ****ʣamadā-*** Yazgh. *zəmāδ*, Xufi *zimāδ*, Šuγn. *zimāδ*, and ****ʣamaxā-***Digor *zænxæ*, Iron *zæxx*, (2) ****būmi-*** YAv. *būmi*-, Sogd. *βwmh* (Ved. *bhū́mi*-), and (3) from an original metaphor ‘the broad one’, the subst. fem. ****pərθu̯ī-*** YAv. *pərəθβīm* (Ved. *pr̥thivī́*-). With the specific connotation of ‘ground’, we find PIr ****budna-*** inherited from PIE, mostly in the form ****buna*-** OAv. *būna*-; YAv. *būna*-; Parth., MPers. *bwn*, *bun*; NPers. *bun*; also the derivative ****budnaka-*** Bactr. *βοναγο*. The substance ‘dust, earth’ figures in IIr. ****(H)āsa-ka-*** (cf. Ved. *ā́sa*-) MPers. *hʾk’*, NPers. *xāk*, Bal. *hāk*. The most significant main relief forms are genuine Iranian words, including ‘mountain’: ****gari-***YAv. *gaⁱri-*, Sogd. *ɣr*-, Bactr. *γαρο*, Yaghn. *ɣar*, Pṣ̌t. *ɣar*. Also ****kau̯fa(h)-*** YAv. *kaofa*-; OPers. *kaufa*; MPers., Parth. *kwf* kōf; NPers. *kōh*; Zaz. *ko*. The OIr. word is reflected also in PNs of the type **Kaufa-zāta*- ‘mountain-born’ (Zadok 2009: 337). There is a clear affinity of metaphoric and metonymic transitions between the semantic fields ‘relief form’ and ‘body part’ (cf. 4.1.); thus, ‘mountain saddle’ > ‘shoulder’: ****kau̯faka-*** MPers. *kwpk* kōfag, Bal. *kōpag*; ‘ear’ > ‘slope’: ****karnā-*** Roshani *čāwn*; > ‘forehead; peak’ (cf. 5.1.): ****ʧakāta-*** MPers. *ckʾt’* čagād, Sogd. *ckʼt*, KurdKurm. *čîya*; ‘neck, mane’ > ‘hill’: ****grīu̯aka-*** MPers. *glywk* grīwag, NPers. *girīwa*. Various derivatives of inherited stems for ‘deep’ come to mean ‘deepening, valley’: ****ʤamfnu-*** YAv. *jąfnu*- or ‘side, edge, shore’: ****ʣambaka-*** ChrSogd. *zmpy*, *zmpw* zambē, zambō. The most widespread lexeme for ‘valley’ within Iranian is ****dara-*** MPers. *dr*; Sogd. *δryh*; Khotan. *dara*-; Munji *daro*, *dara*; in other NIr. languages it means ‘ravine’: Parāči *dūr*, Sariqoli *δer*. Geographical forms met by Iranians only later in their migrations still exhibit common Iranian designations, e.g. ‘ice’: ****ai̯xa-*** YAv. *aēxa*-, Chwrsm. *ʾyx*-, Digor *ex*, Iron *ix*, Yaghn. *īx*, Parāči *īx* (NPers. *yax*) or at least designations common to (certain) NIr. languages. Thus, ‘glacier’: ****i̯aʣā-*** Sariqoli *yoz*, Waxi *yaz*, Kati *yūc*.

3.2. In the semantic domain of ‘waters and water-basins’, the two main words for ‘river, water’ are ****dānu-*** YAv. *dānu*-, Alan. **δānu-*, Oss. *don* and ****srau̯tas-*** OPers. *rautah*-; YAv. *θraotō.s°*; MPers., Parth., Sogd. *rwd* rōd; NPers. *rōd*; Bal. *rōt*. The nomen actionis ‘course’, ****taxman-***, develops the meaning ‘current (water)’: YAv. *taxman*-; Bactr. *ταχμο*, just as is the case with ****tāʧi-*** Khotan. *ttāji*/*ttāja*. The combination of the last two lexical elements appears in compounds like ‘course of a river’: ****srau̯tas-tāʧ-*** YAv. *θraotō.stācō*, *θraotō.stācąm*, or ****srau̯tas-tāka-*** MPers. *lw(t)stʾk* rōstā, rōstāgą; Parth. *rwdystʾg*; NPers. *rōstā*. For ‘large river’ one finds ****paruta-*** YAv. *pauruta*-, Chwrsm. *pwrd*, Digor *ford*, Iron *furd*. The semanteme ‘source, fountain’ is closely related to the notion of ‘digging up’ artificial fountains: ****xā-*/*xaʾ*-** YAv. *xå*, *xąm*. ****xāxā-*** BuddhSogd. *ɣʾɣh, xʾx*; Khotan. *khāha*, *khāhe*; in the meaning ‘source’: ****xākā-*** Ormuri *xākɔ*, Yaghn. *xok* as well as ****xānii̯a-*** YAv. *xąniia*-, MPers. *hʾn’*, Parth. *xʾn*, Bal. *kān*. Also ****xānii̯aka-*** NPers. *xānī*, Bal. *kānīg*. A shared concept for ‘bay’ and ‘shore, bank’ goes back to a semanteme ‘cut’: Ir. ****kárta-*** meaning ‘shore’ in YAv. *kaṣˇa*- and ‘riverbank’ in ****pati-kartā-*** Xufi *piǰōg*, Roshani *piǰōg*. The basic inherited concepts for ‘standing water basins’ are ‘sea, pond’: ****ʣrai̯as-*** YAv. *zraiiō*, Yazgh. *ɣˇůy*; ‘lake, sea’: ****u̯ari-*** YAv. *vairi-*, MPers. *wl* war; and ‘fountain; pond’: ****ʧāt-*** YAv. *cāiti-*, Sogd. *cʾt* čāt, Bactr. *σαδο*, MPers. *čāh*, Bal. *čāt*, NPers. *čāh*. For geographical terms and (para)toponyms, see Rozova and Savina (1975) with Tajik evidence. Characteristic of the wordfield ‘water (as substance)’ are, beside the obviously ancient root-noun **ā́p-*/**ap-* ‘water’ (meaning also ‘current of water, river, etc.’), the various words for ‘drop’: ****ʦrasʧa-*** YAv. *srasciṇtaē*°, Chwrsm. *cš*-, Pṣ̌t. *cac*-, also ****ʦraska-*** Parth. *srsk* srask, MPers. *sl(y)šk’* srešk, NPers. *sirišk*, Waxi *xˇak* and ****ʦrakā-*** Sariqoli *xˇōk*-, *xˇikt*. Here belongs also the notion of ‘foam’: ****kafa-***, ***kafā-*** YAv. *kafa*-, MPers. *kp* kaf, NPers. *kaf*, Bal. *kap*, Yaghn. *xaf(a)*. The inherited word (PIIr. **phaiman*-) is attested in the substantivized derivatives ****fai̯mna-*** NPers. *fīn* and ****fai̯mnakā*-** perhaps in Sogd. *pymʾkh*, NPers. *fīnak*, Digor *finkæ*, Iron *fynk*.

3.3. The sphere of ‘earth characteristics, terrains, and their constitution’ includes, e.g. ‘stone’: ****aʦan-*** YAv. *asān*-, OPers. *asā*, Bactr. *αþνη*-. Old and widespread is also ****aʦanga-*** YAv. *asəṇga*-, OPers. *aθanga*-, Parth. *ʾsn(n)g* asang, Bactr. *ασαγγε*, Yaghn. *sank(a)*, KurdKurm. *seng*. Related to the family of ‘mountain’ is the notion of ‘stone heap’: ****gāri̯a-*** Waxi *ɣˇor ~ ɣor*. Of more recent age are ****grai̯a-*** ‘clay’ Yidgha *ɣuroi*, Šuγn. *ǰirāy* and ****ʦikā*-** ‘gravel’ OPers. *θikā*-, also in NIr.; from its root is built ****ʦikatā-*** ‘sand’ Sogd. *šykth*, MPers. *sygd*, Digor *sigit*, Iron *syǧyt*.

3.4. Words for ‘minerals (esp. metalloids) and (physical) processes related to them’ generally belong to younger lexical strata, showing mostly inner-Iranian correspondences. Thus, ‘salt’ (cf. 4.5.): ****namadā-*** Khotan. *namva*, *namve*; another derivative is ****namaθkā-*** Parth. *nmydk*, Sogd. *nmʾδkh*, NPers. *namak*, Sanglechi *nəmēɣδ*. Words like ‘charcoal’: ****nigāra-*** Šuγn. *nižōr*; Xufi, Roshani *nižůr* lead to the subject of physical processes like ‘to burn’ **θau̯a-*/*θau̯i̯a-*: *θuta*-: Chwrsm. *θw*-: *θw(y)d*; Bartangī *θīw*-: *θud*, *θad*; Waxi *θaw*-, *θit*: *θət* and ‘burning, flame’: ****θāu̯a-*** Sogd. *pr-δʾw*, Chwrsm. *θʾw* θāw, Ashkun *dau*, Waigali *dāu*. While this last word is particularly widespread in Iranian, we also find the two main inherited words for ‘fire/Fire’ as phenomenon and as deity, viz. ****agni-*** in OIr. PNs such as YAv. *Dāštāɣni*-, OPers. **Agni-farnah-* and continuing up to NIr., if Yazgh. *aɣnág* ‘flintstone’ is to be interpreted as ‘fire-stone’. The fundamental (I)Ir. term for ‘fire/Fire’, however, remains ****ātər-***, ***āθr-*** YAv. *ātarš*, *ātrəm*, *āθrō*; Parth. *ʾtrw*; Bactr. *αδορ- ~ αϑþο*; MPers. *ʾtwr*, *ʾdwr* ādur; NPers. *āðar*, [*ātaš*]; Oss. *art*. Further regional concepts in the sphere of ‘fire’ are ****angāra-*** Ashkun, Waigali *aṅā́*; Kati *aṅā́* and ****θau̯nā-*** Digor *tunæ* ‘beam’. Derivatives of the word for ‘fire’ mean not only ‘igneous’ but also ‘ash’: ****āθrii̯a- ~* **āθəri̯a- ~* **ātəri̯a-*** YAv. *ātriia*-; Khotan. *āhära*-; Roshani, Bartangī, Roshorvi *aθēr*; also ****āθraka-*** Sogd. *ʾʾšʾk, ʾʾšʾy* āśe. But the special term for ‘ash(es)’ is ****pānsnu-*** YAv. *pąsnu*-, Khotan. *phānä*, Digor *funuk*, Iron *fænyk*. Iranian exhibits two old words for ‘smoke’: ****dūta-*** YAv. *dūta*-; Parth., MPers. *dwd* dūd; Chwrsm. *δwd*; NPers. *dūd*; Šuγn. *δūd* and also ****dūmá-*** Khotan. *dumä, duma*-; Ashkun *dūm*. OPers. in particular displays several designations for precious stones, cf. Bleichsteiner (1930) and now Schmitt (2014). Semantic shifts may play a role here, as in the word for ‘pearl’: ****mudrā-*** Bactr. *μολρο*, Khotan. *mūra* (Ved. *mudrā*-) meaning also ‘precious stone’.

3.5. Metals: The word ****ʣarani̯a-*** that, as shown by Ved. *híraṇya-*, might in IIr. have originally possessed a larger meaning of ‘noble metal’ (cf. Rau 1974), is clearly focused on the semanteme ‘gold’ (also ‘golden’): YAv. *zaraniia*-; OPers. *daraniya*-; Sogd. *zyrn*, *zyn*; Bactr. *ζαρο*; Digor *zærijnæ*; Iron *zærin*. Its main derivative, with the material adjective suffix, is ****ʣaranai̯na-*** ‘golden’: YAv. *zaranaēna*-; MPers. *zlyn’*, *zryn* zarrēn; NPers. *zarrīn*. The inherited lexeme for ‘silver’ is ****ə/arʣata-*:** YAv. *ərəzata*-, OPers. *aṛ data*-, Chwrsm. *ʾžyd*; Digor *ærzæt*, Iron *ærzæt*. The metal ‘copper’, derived from a color word for ‘reddish’, is called in Iranian ****rau̯da-*** MPers. *lwd*, *rwy*; NPers. *rōy*; Bal. *rōd*. The derivational base of the main words for ‘iron’ is ****aʦu̯an- ~ aʦun-***, contained in ‘iron’ (> ‘ploughshare’ by synecdoche): ****aʦu̯ana-*** Digor *æfsæn*, Iron *æfsæn*. Further derivatives of the same stem in the meaning ‘iron’ are: ****aʦu̯ani̯a-*** Chwrsm. *ʾspny*, *spny* (ə)spanī; Khotan. *hīśśana*-; Šuγn. *sipin*; Waxi *(y)išn*, and ****āʦu̯ani̯ā-*** MPers. *ʾsyn* āsen; Munji *yūspən*. Also ****āʦuna-*** Parth. *ʾswn* āsun, MPers. *ʾ(ʾ)hwn* āhun; NPers. *āhan*, Talishi *osыn*. ‘Made of iron’ is ****aʦu̯an(i̯)ai̯naka-*** BuddhSogd. *ʾspnʾynʾy, ʾspynynch*; ManSogd. *ʾspnyn(y)*; ChrSogd. *spnync* spənēnē, spənēnč. On the designations for metals in Ossetic, cf. Joki (1962).

## 4. Animate nature

4.1. Plants: General concepts concerning subdivisions and parts of plants, which then develop the usual metaphoric connotations and phraseological contexts (‘roots of evil’, ‘fruits of work’, etc.), mostly go back to PIIr. and PIE lexemes. This is especially true of the various elements of plants such as ‘root’: ****rau̯taka*/*rau̯θaka-*** Bal. *rōtag* (borrowed in Brahūi as *rōtk*), ‘fruit’: ****bara(ka)*-** Sogd. *βrʼk*, *βryy*, *bry*, *brw* varē; Chwrsm. *βrk*, and the two words for ‘leaf’: ****parna-*** YAv. *parəna*-; Sogd. *prn*; MPers. *pl*, *pr* parr; Kurd-Kurm. *pʰer̄*; NPers. *parr* (together with the derivative ****parnaka-*** Parth. *prg* parrag) and ****u̯arka-*** YAv. *varəka*-; MPers. *wlg*, *włg* warg; KurdKurm. *belg*; Gīlakī *bərg*; NPers. *barg*, with derivative ****u̯arkara-*** Parth. *wrgr* wargar, Sogd. *wrkr*, Khotan. *bāggara*-. The word for ‘bud’, ****tau̯ka-*** Digor *tog*, Iron *tug*, Yidgha *tūga*, develops the metaphoric meaning ‘blood’ (5.1.3.), just like the archaic word for ‘bough, branch’ also means ‘antlers’ (5.1.): ****ɕāxā-* / *ɕākā-*** Ved. *śā́khā*- < PIIr. **(t)ćākhā*-; for Iranian, see MPers. *šʾk’* šāg ~ *šʾhʾn* šāxān; specialized for ‘branch’ is ****ʧangā-*** NPers. *čang*, Pṣ̌t. *c’ānga*. Also of PIIr. origin is ****rudmii̯a-*** ‘sprouting’ YAv. *uruθmiia-* < **rudʰmiya*-. Further elements of plants provide a bridge to the *conditio humana*; thus, the diverse words for ‘seed’ (5.2.): ****bīʣaka-*** Sogd. *βyzʾk* vīzē < PIIr. **bīja*-, Ved. *bīja*-. ****ʧiθra-*** (O/YAv. *ciθra*-, OWIr. *ciça*-; richly attested in MIr. and NIr.) means ‘(human) seed’ and thence ‘descent, origin, nature’ (5.2.); cf. its derivative ****ʧiθraka-*** Parth. *cyhrg* čihrag, MPers. *cyhlk* čihrag, NPers. *čihra*. The connotations of ‘seed(s)’ and ‘*genus*’ (5.2.) are visible in ****tau̯xman-*** YAv. *taoxma*; Parth. *twxm*, Bactr. *τοχμανο*, Yaghn. *taxm*, NPers. *tuxm*.

The names of (cultural) plants in Modern Iranian languages of Pamir and Eastern Afghanistan have been the object of exemplary studies such as Schapka (1972a) and Steblin-Kamenskij (1982); the quota of inherited (I)Ir. notions is very high, reflecting the already generic categories of concepts like ‘grain, corn’ (5.2.): ****dānā-*** Šuγn. *δůn*; Xufi, Roshani *δōn* and its derivative ****dānaka-*** ‘seed, seed(ling)s’ Yazgh. *δan’āg*, Šuγn. *δůnǰ*, also NPers. *dāna*. In competition with the common IE word for ‘grass’, ****tərna-***MPers. *tlk*; Khotan. *ttarrä*, *ttarre*, is ****margii̯ā-*** ‘grass’, a feminine substantivation of an appurtinative adj. derived from ****margā-***, whose meaning in Iranian is ‘meadow, grass, woods’ (rather than ‘road’, as in Indic).

The continuant of the PIE word for ‘wood, tree’ is ****dāru-*** YAv. *dāuru*-; MPers. *dʼl* dār; NPers., Bal. *dār*, which coexists, particularly in MIr., with its derivative ****dāruka-***‘wood’ Parth. *dʼlwg dālū˘g*; Sogd. *δʼrwʼk*, *δʼrwq ð’āruk*; also NIr.: Yaghn. *dork*, Šuγn. *δōrg*. The former word signifies both the material and the plant, while Ir. ****u̯an-***, ***u̯anā-***, together with derivatives ****u̯anakā-* **u̯anāka-* **u̯anasika-***, is specialized in the meaning ‘tree’ (and ‘wood’ in the sense of ‘forest’). Among the various species, the category of fruit-trees comprises terms for fruit pervasive in moderate and subtropical zones, such as ****amarnā-*** ‘apple’, ****padka-*** ‘apple/poplar?’, ****gau̯ʣā-*** ‘walnut’, ****nāxa-*** ‘apricot’, but also ****ərmāka-*** ‘date(-tree/fruit)’. Shrubs and various bush types are partly described with terms of a more generic character in the proto-language but with specialization of meaning, just as an earlier ‘thorny bush’ (Gmc. **wart*) develops to ‘rose’ not only in Greek but also in Iranian: ****u̯ard- ~ u̯ərd-*** (with a deriv. ****u̯ərdaka-***) in MPers. *gwl gul*, Parth. *wʾr*, Sogd. *wrd warδ*, NPers. *gul*, borrowed via Turkic into SSlav. and other European languages. Of OIr. attestation are lexemes like ‘ivy’: ****θanū-*** YAv. *θanuuas-ca*, cf. NPers. *san*, while ‘blackcurrant’: ****ʤanata-*** is limited to Bajui *ɣˇinīd*, Xufi *ɣˇenūd*. Such plant names form interesting isoglosses, e.g. ****dramna-*** ‘a shrub, wormwood’, attested in WMIr.: MPers. *dlmnk*, NPers. *dirmana*, shows up in Yaghn. *dirawna* and in the Pamir languages: Ishk. *dərəm*; Munji *lərīvä(n)*; Šuγn., Xufi, Roshani, Bartangī *cūδm*.

Beside the more generic concepts for ‘grain, corn’ cited above, cereals are represented by common Iranian lexemes such as ****arʣana-*** ‘millet’ and ****kaʦaka-*** ‘barley’. The word ****i̯au̯a-***, so well attested in the last meaning in Indic, has undergone semantic broadening to ‘grain’, in which value it is employed in competition with or parallel to ****ʤāra-*** of the same meaning. Beside various vegetables such as ‘garlic’, perhaps ****ʦigra-***, other plants of practical use occur in the inherited lexicon, including prairie and forest plants spread throughout Eurasia, such as ‘birch’: ****barʣā-*** < PIIr. **bʰr̥Hȷ́a*- (Ved. *bhūrja*-) in Alan. **barzā*, Digor *bærzæ*, Iron *bærz*, partly in the form ***fərʣā-*** Waxi *fürz*. These alternate with spatially more limited terms, often adapting old loanwords, e.g. ‘jujuba’: ****ʦinʦitā-*** Khotan. *śīṃja*, *śiji*; Wanetsi *sinj’ī*; Munji *siǰīä* or ****ʦinkatā-*** Sogd. *synkt*-. Similarly, aquatic plants or those growing close to water, such as ‘willow’: ****u̯ai̯ti-*** YAv. *vaēti-*, Khotan. *bī*, MPers. *wyt* wēd, NPers. *bēd*, Bal. *gēt* continue well-established IE words, while ****gaʣa-*** ‘reed; firewood; tamarisk’ is limited to MIr. and NIr. Among the medicinal and cultic plants, the word for ‘soma plant’, ****anʦu-*** YAv. *ąsu*-, is of common PIIr. heritage, derived from **anćú*- Ved. *aṁśú*-, both Indic and Iranian showing traces of the semantic specialization from ‘stem, stalk’ to the ‘(soma/haoma) stalk’ *par excellence*.

4.2. Animals and humans: Both spheres contain notions from the domains of ‘biological life, life functions, everyday life’ (5.), especially joint concepts of ‘body parts, anatomy; body secretions’ (5.1) and ‘gender, sex, procreation, birth’ (5.2) of both humans and animals. Cf. the metaphorical use of ****əršān-*** ‘male, bull, stallion’ (5.2). Such generic categories come into existence by substantivization of (qualitative) adjectives, together with semantic change. Thus, the notion of ‘animal’, ****ʣu̯ara-***, from an agentival adj. ‘going crookedly’; analogously, ****mərga-*** ‘(wild) animal’ → ‘bird’, cf. the shift from ****āʦu-* < **aHʦú-*** ‘fast’ → ‘antelope, deer’, also suffixed: ****āʦu-ka-***. The same is true of notions from the sphere of ‘cultivation’ like ‘wild’: cf. ****kau̯fi̯aka-*** MPers. *kwpyk’* kōfīg, NPers. *kōhī*, KurdKurm. *kʰûvî* ‘deer’.

4.2.1. Among domestic animals, Iranian of all periods possesses several avatars of the PIIr. root noun for ‘dog’ (**ć[u]u̯ā́n-*/ *ćun-*) with no essential phonetic change, as ****ʦ(u)u̯ān-* / *ʦun-***: YAv. *spā*, *spānəm* / *sūnō*; also the adjective ‘doglike; dog’: ****ʦu̯aka-***YAv. *spaka*- (cf. Hdt. 1,110,1 concerning the “Persian” word for ‘dog’, *σπακα*); while Parth. *ʽyspg* preserves the initial cluster, as do some CtrIr. dialects (NE, SE) and most Pamir languages, MPers. *sgʾn* sag- and NPers. *sag* exhibit a different isogloss. In addition, original diminutives like ****kuta-*** ‘dog’ abound since MIr.: Sogd. *ʾkwt-y*; Bactr. *κοδο*; Šuγn., Xufi, Roshani, Bartangī *kud*, cf. the derived feminine ****kutī-*** ‘bitch; dog’, as well as ****ʦu̯aʧī-*** ‘bitch’. ****gadu̯a-*** ‘dog’ is largely limited to the Pamir domain.

Just as was the case in PIE, Iranian distinguishes between ‘(small) cattle; sheep’, ****paʦú- ~ fšu-***, and ‘large farm animals, cattle’, ****stau̯ra-***. By metonymic extension, the root noun for ‘cow’, ****gāu̯-***, develops the connotation ‘cattle’, as does its derivatives ****gau̯ma-*** (Digor *ɣom*) and ****gau̯ka-*** (Chwrsm. *ɣwk*); on the other hand, the derivative ****gau̯aʣna-***develops the meaning ‘deer’ in YAv. *gauuasna*-; Sogd. *ɣʾwzn*, *ɣwznh*; also as a LW in Armen. *gavazan*. The inherited word for ‘one-year old’ > ‘calf’ (PIE **u̯et-s-ó-*), ****u̯aʦa-*** Digor *wæs*, Yazgh. *wůs*, has already developed the generic meaning ‘calf (of any age)’, as have its derivatives ****u̯aʦa-ka-*** (Khotan. *basaka*-), ****u̯aʦa-ka-ka-*** (Ormuri *ɣoskák*), and ****u̯aʦ-i̯a-ka-*** (MPers. *whyk*, *whyg* wahīg); but beside the generic word for ‘lamb’, ****u̯arān*-, *u̯arn*-** (MPers. *wlʾn* warān, KurdKurm. *beran*) with the diminutives ****u̯araka-*** and ****u̯arnaka-***, several Iranian languages differentiate between ‘lamb (up to 1 year old)’, ****āgara-*** (Xufi *ažor*, Roshani *ažor*) or ****āgarī-*** (Xufi *ažær*. Roshani *ažēr*), and ‘lamb of 1(-2) years’, ****san-ʤāma-*** (Šuγn. *anjům*), ****san-ʤāmī-*** (Šuγn. *anjēm*). Further small-cattle designations include ‘he-goat, billy goat’: ****aʣa-*** (YAv. *azō*; MPers. *ʾz*) with its derivative ****aʣaka-*** MPers. *ʾzg*; NPers. *azg*, as well as ****buʣa-*** YAv. *būza*-; MPers. *bwc* buz; NPers. *buz*. The latter is the most common term in Iranian, as opposed to the regionally more limited **tura-* ‘goat’ Khotan. *ttura* pl., Digor *dzæbo-dur*, Iron *dzæbi-dyr*. The designations of ‘young (animal): kid, calf’ come from a semanteme ‘grown up’: ****fragāma-*** (Waxi *rüɣˇum*), ****fragāmaka-***, just as do the terms for ‘young cow’: ****fragāmakā-*** and ****fragāmaʧī-*** (Šuγn. *farɣēmc*). Well-known PIE and PIIr. terms are reflected in ‘male, bull, stallion’ (5.2): ****əršān-*** and ‘horse’: ****áʦu̯a-*** with the derived fem. ****áʦu̯ā-*** ‘mare’ (beside more regional [Pamir] ****bāraʧī-*** and ****mātakā-*** ‘mare’); on terms for horses, see Sadovski in Sadovski and Panaino (2013: 7 ff. on Avestan) andBenveniste 1931). Of IIr. diffusion are ****uštra-*** ‘camel’ and ****xara-*** ‘(± little) donkey’. ****xaraka-*** (and ****xarā-*** ‘she-ass’) ‘mule, hinny’. This latter meaning appears as a derivative of both ‘horse’ and ‘donkey’: ****aʦu̯a-tara-*** and ****xara-tara*(-*ka*)-**. Among the creatures of fields and forests, the large rapacious animals have archaic and well-spread designations, e.g. ‘bear’: ****(H)ə́rk͡ɕa-*** YAv. *arša*- and ‘wolf’: ****u̯ə́rka-*** (‘she-wolf’: ****u̯ərʧī-***) or a series of names (sometimes tabuistically changed), such as ‘fox’: ****rau̯paka-*** (Kurd.), ****rau̯paʦā-*** (Shuγnī group), ****rau̯pāʦa-*** (OPers. **raupāθa*-, Sogd. *rwpsh* rōp[a]s), but also ****rau̯pā˘ʦaka-*** and ****rau̯pi-***. The IIr. words for ‘boar’: Ir. ****u̯arāʣa-*** share the same mythological significance, as avatars of deities of war (such as Vərəθraγna-); also more exotic animals like the ‘leopard’: ****pərdanga-*** share designations beyond the branches, cf. MPers. *płng* palang, Sogd. *pwrδnk*, Pṣ̌t. *pṛāng*. We can even reconstruct a PIIr. **pića*- ‘leopard’ based on Ved. *piśá*- and PIr. ****piʦa-*** (Kulikov 2009), and ****kuu̯astra-*** means both ‘leopard’ and more generally ‘predator’. Some names of aquatic animals are of IE origin, e.g. ‘otter’: ****udrā˘*-** m./f. and ****udraka-*** (derivatives from the word for ‘water’) or common IIr. formations like ‘turtle’: ****kaʦi̯apa-***, ****kaʦi̯apaka-***, cf. Ved. *kaśyápa-* ‘id.’.

4.2.2. In the semantic field ‘birds’, beside archaic PIE lexemes denoting associated concepts like ‘egg’, ****(H)āu̯i̯ā˘-*** (cf. Schindler 1969), or ‘nest’, ****āsadi̯a-*** (on concepts of ‘bird’, esp. in Old Iranian, see Benveniste 1960), there are many common IIr. terms, particularly for birds of prey, such as ‘falcon, hawk’: ****ʦi̯ai̯na-*** (YAv. *sāena*-, MPers. *syn*, NPers. *sī-murġ*), cf. Ved. *śyéna-*. The variation in ‘eagle, vulture’ − ****ʧarka*/*u-***, ****ʧarkāʦa-*** (Alan. **čarkasi*, Oss. *cærgæs*) vs. ***karkā˘ʦa-*** (YAv. *kahrkāsa*-, Chwrsm. *krkys*) − bespeaks different ablaut grades rather than tabuistic modifications or adaptations of loanwords. Of IIr. origin are words for ‘feathered game’ such as ‘partridge’: ****kapa-***, ****kapaka-*** and ****tatar-*** and ‘pigeon’: ****kapau̯tatara-***, ****kapau̯tikā-***. There is a mutual relationship between color denominations such as ‘blue, green’ and bird designations like ‘pigeon’: if ****axšai̯naka-*** primarily means ‘(dark) blue’ and then ‘pigeon’, ****kapau̯ta-***and ****kapau̯taka-*** are primary lexemes of the domain ‘birds’ that have developed the connotation ‘blue, green’. On birds in Iranian, see Goodell (1979) and Schapka (1972b on Persian). The Iranian term for ‘chicken’ is ****kárka-*** (YAv. *kahrka*-), cf. ‘rooster, hen’: ****kərka-***, fem. ****kərkā-*** ‘hen’ with derivative ****karki̯ā-*** (Pṣ̌t. *čirga*). Aquatic and barnyard birds include ‘duck’: ****āti-***, ****ātikā-*** (< PIIr. **aHti-*).

Terms for ‘fish’ are ****maʦi̯a-*** (YAv. *masiia*-, Waigali *maċ*) < PIIr. **matsya*-, Ved. *mátsya*-; also ****māʦi̯ā˘ka-*** (MPers. *mʾhyk’*, *mʾhyg*; NPers. *māhī*) as well as ****kapa-*** (Khotan. *kavä*/*kava*, *kave*; Yidgha *kap*). Reptiles are represented by ancient terms for ‘snake’ and ‘(primordial) dragon’, such as ****aʤi-*** (YAv. *aži-*, Yidgha *īž*), Ved. *áhi*- < PIIr. **(H)aǰʰi*-, or younger ones, such as ****du̯axsa-*** (in Pamir and Waxi, Sanglechi *woxs*, Waxi *fuks*); mythologically relevant (as incarnation of diseases and demons) is also ‘worm’: ****kərmi-*** < PIIr. **kr̥mi*-, cf. Ved. *kŕ̥mi*-. Among the various inherited words for ‘insects’, those that prevail designate primarily harmful creatures (*daēva-*friendly in Zoroastrian cosmology) and show a large degree of tabuistic modification in the order of their consonants within the IE languages. These include ****fruši-*** ‘flea’ and ****u̯abza-*** / ****u̯abzakā˘*-**‘wasp’; cf. also ‘fly’: ****makaʦā-*, **makaʦaka-*** < PIIr. **makaćā˘*-, Ved. *makáśa*- and ‘spider’: ****u̯arnau̯a-*** / ****u̯arnau̯aba-***; an inherited lexeme for an innocent insect is that for ‘ant’: ****maru̯i-*** (YAv. *maoiri*-), ****maru̯iʧi***/***a(ka)-*** (Sogd. *mʾwrc*), with a permuted order of consonants relative to its Indic cognate: cf. Ved. *vamrá*-, *vamrī́*- < PIIr. **u̯arm*-.

4.2.3. All inherited PIIr. lexemes for ‘human being’ are present in Iranian, starting with the generic ‘mortal; (hu)man’ (5.): ****marta-*** (YAv. *maṣˇa*-)**, **mártii̯a-*** (YAv. *maṣ̌iia*-, OPers. *martiya*-) and including ****ʣana-* <** **ȷ́ánHa-* ‘the born one’ (OPers. **dana*-, *zana*-; Khotan. *ysani*-), ****dasa-*** (OPers. *dahā*, Sogd. *δx*, Khotan. *daha*-), and the gender-characterized ‘(hu)man’: ****(H)nar-*** (Av. *nar*-; MPers. *nl*, *nr* nar) < PIIr. **Hnar*-, Ved. *nár*- and its derivatives, signaling concepts for ‘male’ like ****(H)nari̯a-*** (5.2).

The lexical range of ‘woman’ contains both generic pendants to masculine words like ****ʤáni-*** (YAv. *jaini-*; MPers. *zn’*, *zn* zan; NPers. *zan*) and specific terms for ‘female, woman’ like ****strī-***/****str̥i̯ā-*** (YAv. *strī*-, Waxi *strəy*) and ****strīʧī-***/***strīkā-*** (5.2). Two other lexical groups belonging here are ****i̯au̯šā***, ***i̯au̯šan-*** ‘female, woman’ (Digor *wosæ*, Iron *us*) and ****kanii̯ān-***, ***kanīn-*** ‘girl’ (< ****kaniHan-***/***kaniHn-***) YAv. *kaniiā, kainīn*-, with the diminutive derivatives ****kanii̯akā-*** (MPers. *knyk*, *knyg* kanīg) and ****kanīʧī-*** ‘(young) girl’ (Sogd. *knc*, NPers. *kanīz*).

## 5. Biological life, life functions, everyday life

A number of derivatives of the PIE root **gʷih₃* ‘live’ have survived in Iranian, e.g. the **-i-* abstract / n. act. ‘life’: ****ʤīti-*** YAv. -*jīti*- (< PIIr. **ȷˇiHti-*), formations with other suffixes like ****ʤīnākā-*** Sogd. *žynʾkh*, Bactr. *ζιναγο*, and especially those with the suffix *-u̯o-*, including, with full-grade of the root, ****ʤi̯āu̯a-*** Bactr. *ζαο*, *ζαοι*, etc. (< PIIr. **ȷˇi̯a-Hu̯a-*) and especially, with zero-grade of the root, the avatars of the IE adj. **gʷih₃-u̯ó-*(on PIE, cf. Klein 1988: 258 ff.) ‘alive, living’: ****ʤīu̯a-*** YAv. *juua*-, OPers. *jīva*-, Parth. *jyw*- < PIIr. **ȷˇiHu̯á-* (Ved. *jīvá*-) with its derivative ****ʤīu̯ii̯a-*** YAv. *jīuuiia-* ‘belonging to/ necessary for living’ (cf. EWA 1,594 with lit.). The *-ro-* derivative has the connotation of ‘lively, vivacious’: ****ʤīra-*** YAv. *jī˘ra*-, MPers. *zyr* zīr, KurdKurm. *jîr* < ePIr. ****ʤiHrá-***. The main continuously attested item for the concept ‘dead’ is ****mərta-*** YAv. *mərəta*-; MPers. *mwlt’*, *mwrd*; Parth. *mwrd*; Sogd. *mrt*-, *mwrt*-; Oss. *mard*; NPers. *murd*; Bal. *murt* with its derivative ****mərtaka-*** ‘dead; corpse’ MPers. *mwrdg* murdag, Yaghn. *murta*. The derivatives for ‘death’ are either n. act./abstr. ****mərtu- ~ mərθu̯-*** BuddhSogd., Man-Sogd. *mwrδw* murθu; Parth. *mwrt* murt or agentivals, as in Ved. *mr̥tyú-*: PIr. ****mərθi̯u-***YAv. *mərəθiiu*-, OPers. *-m-r-š-i-y-u* /*-məršiyu-*/. Rarely, they are substantivizations of *-ro-* adjectives: ****mərθra-*** Sogd. *myδr*-, Bactr. *μορλο* or other formations: ****márka-*** ‘death, destruction’ OAv. *marəka*-; YAv. *mahrka*-; Parth. *mrd*; MPers. *mlt*, *mrd* mard; NPers. *mard*. (On ‘mortal; [hu]man’ − ****márta-***, ****mártii̯a-***, see above, 4.2.3) Cf. further ****au̯šas-***‘death’ YAv. *aošah*-, MPers. *hwš*, NPers. *hōš*. The notions of ‘age’ and ‘time’ are strongly interconnected in Iranian cosmology and anthropology in the notion of ****ʣaru̯ān-***YAv. *zauruuan*- (cf. now Panaino, To appear); MPers. *zarwān*; Digor *zærwæ*, *zæræ*. For the meaning ‘old’, beside the PIE *Erbwort* ****ʣarant-*** < ePIr. ****ʣarHant-*** Oss. *zærond*, Iranian uses ****kafu̯an-***/****kapun-*** Parth. *kfwn* kafwan; MPers. *khwbn’*, *qhwn* kahwan; NPers. *kahun*, *kuhan*, with derivatives ****kapunaka-*** Bactr. *καβογγο* and ****kafnaka-*** Parth. *kfng* kafnag. On the semantic field of ‘old age’ in Sogdian, cf. Emmerick (1969). For ‘young, new’, beside derivatives of **h₂i̯u-Hon-* ‘young’ (← **h₂ói̯u-*/*h₂éi̯u-* ‘vigor, etc.’ below) or ****nau̯a-*** ‘new, fresh, etc.’ YAv. *nauua*-; Roshani, Bartangī *nā˘w* < PIIr. **náwa*-(Ved. *náva*-) with derivative ****nau̯aka-*** MPers. *nwk* nōg, Bactr. *νωγο*, Digor *næwæg*, Iron *næwæg*, in NIr. we find ****ʦraxta-*** ‘fresh, new’ Waxi *ṣəɣˇd*. PIE **h₂ói̯u-*/*h₂éi̯u-*, PIIr. **Hā́i̯u-*/*Hái̯u-* ‘vigor, vitality; lifetime’ > ****āi̯u-*** YAv. *āiiu*-, gen. *yaoš*; Alan. **yāwa*; Digor *jawæ*; Iron *jaw*.

5.1. Body parts, anatomy; body fluids: Onomasiological themes, including the role of metaphoric and metonymic processes, have been explored more in the field of body-part terminology than in other lexical domains, especially by Filippone (2006; 2010 for hand, fingers and individual finger names in Ir. and beyond; and 2000−2003 for the fingers in Balochi); for concepts of ‘head’ and its parts, see Nussbaum (1986) and Filippone (1995 ‘pupil of the eye’). Generic terms of anatomy such as ‘body part’: ****san-dāman-*** YAv. *haṇdāma*; Yidgha *hadamë* spread as Iranian LWs, e.g. in Khowar *hʌ’dām*. We discover some surprising *pars pro toto* designations of ‘body, self’, such as ****grīu̯ā-*** ‘neck’ (see also below); for usual developments like ****mərtaka-*** ‘dead body’, cf. 5.; also, ****madi̯āna-***‘middle of the body, waist’. In this section, we shall distinguish between concepts of ‘body in general’, ‘body fluids’, and ‘biological systems’ within the organism (both of animals and humans).

5.1.1. Starting with the domains of ‘trunk’ and ‘head’, inherited formations for ‘back, backbone’: ****pəršti-*** YAv. *paršti*-, Bactr. *(α)σπαρσο*, Parth. *pwšt*, NPers. *pušt*, KurdKurm. *pišt* stand beside specific Iranian ones: Pamir ****kamaka-*** Šuγn. *čůmč*, Sariqoli *čomǰ*, Sanglechi *kamak*. For ‘tail’: ****duma-*** / ***dumba-*** YAv. *duma*-; MPers. *dwm(b)* dum(b); Sogd. *δwm, δwnp*; Bal. *dumb*; NPers. *dum(b)*; also its derivative ****dum(b)aka-*** Khotan. *dumaa*-, Bal. *dumbag*. Beside PIr. ****pāʣas-*** ‘side’ YAv. *pāzah-uuaṇt*-, Bactr. *παζο*, Waxi *pʉz*, Sariqoli *puz* < PIIr. **pā́ȷ́as*-/*páHȷ́as-* (Ved. *pā́jas*-), we find in the Pamir languages ****ʣamb(i)i̯a-*** Šuγn. *zīm(bā́)*, Yazgh. *zā˘m(b)* ‘half, side; bottom/behind’. The inherited IIr. word for ‘belly’, ****udara-***, is best preserved in EIr. YAv. *uδara*-, Chwrsm. *ʼwδy˘r* uðər, Yaghn. *dara* and ****udaraka-*** Pṣ̌t. *l’əray*; some alternative lexemes are, in both E and WMIr., ****ʤaθāra-*** MPers. *zahār*, Khotan. *jsahāra*-, or, mostly in Pers.: ****skamba-*** MPers. *?aškamb*, NPers. *šikam* and ****skambaka-*** NPers. *šikámpa*; in OIr. cf. also ****mərʣāna-***YAv. *mərəzāna*-. A rich palette of semantemes gives rise to the notion of ‘navel, umbilical cord’, also ‘(extended) family, *gens*’ (Kümmel, To appear₂): ****nāf-***/***nāfah-*** YAv. *nāfō* < PIIr. **nābʰ(h)- ~* **nábʰah*-; cf. ****nāfa-*** < **nābʰa*- YAv. *nāfāi*; M/NPers. *nāf*, and its derivative ‘navel; umbilical cord’: ****nāfaka-*** MPers. *nʾp̄k, nʾpg, nʾfg* nāfag; Bal. *nāpag*; cf. also the *-i-*stem ‘navel’: ****nāfi-*** Khotan. *nehä*; Digor *naf(f)æ*; Xufi, Roshani *nēf* < PIIr. **nā́bʰ(h)i*- (Ved. *nā́bhi*-).

For ‘head’, the original IE item is alive and well in Iranian: ****ʦaras-*** YAv. *sarah*-; MPers., NPers. *sar*; but the popular term ****kamard-***/***kamərd-*** YAv. *kamərəδa*-, which in Zoroastrian has “daēvic” value, is the normal term for ‘head’ in the rest of Iranian: Bactr. *καμιρδο*, MPers. *kmʾl* kamāl (= NPers.), cf. ****kamərdakā-*** Yidgha *kyɛmalɣo*; isolated is ****u̯agdana-*** neut. in YAv. *vaɣδanəm*. The original notion of ‘(the part coming) to the eye(s)’, ****anīka-***, means in Iranian, as in Vedic (IIr. **áni-Hka*-) and beyond (EWA 1,73), ‘front’, ‘face’, or ‘forehead’ MPers. *anīg*; NPers. *pēš-ānī*; cf. ****anīʧaka-*** ‘forehead’ Bal. *(h)anīčag*. A similar vacillation between ‘front side’ and ‘forehead’ is seen in ****tāra-***Khotan. *ttāra*-, NPers. *tār* (Oss. ‘breast’: Iron *tar*); the meanings ‘forehead’ and ‘peak’ are embodied in ****ʧakāta-*** MPers. *ckʾt’* čagād, Sogd. *ckʼt*, KurdKurm. *čîya*. Other words for ‘front part; anterior, first’ come to mean also ‘face’: ****nasu̯ant-*** MPers. *nxwyn* naxwēn, *nhwst*, *nxw(y)st* naxust; NPers. *nuxušt*; Yaghn. *nax*. The neutral IIr. word for ‘face’ is ****rau̯das-*** MPers. *lwd*, *rwy*; NPers. *rōy*. Metaphorical connotations of ‘face’ are contained in the semantemes of words like ****ʧiθra-*** ‘clear, visible; shape, appearance, face; phenomenon’ O/YAv. *ciθra*-, Parth. *cyhr*, NPers. *čihr* < PIIr. **ćitrá*- (Ved. *citrá*-) with its derivative ****ʧiθraka-*** ‘face; proof’ Parth. *cyhrg* čihrag, Alan. *cyhrg*. Characteristic of all kinds of body/head parts is the frequent use of diminutives of inherited lexemes; cf. for ‘nose’ the transponat ****nāsaʧi-*** Sogd. *nyc*, Yaghn. *nays*, Šuγn. *nε̄j*, or the implementation of words from other (socio)linguistic registers instead of traditional designations: cf. ****u̯ai̯ni-*** ‘nose’ Bal. *gīn*, KurdKurm. *bên*, with its derivative ****u̯ai̯nii̯aka-*** MPers. *wynyk*, *wynyg*; NPers. *bīnī*. By contrast, continuous preservation of lexical archaisms of PIE/ PIIr. age is seen in the two main designations for ‘eye’: ****axš-*** > ****aš-*** O/YAv. *aš-* in instr. du. *ašibiiā˘*, Ashkun *aċ’ī*, Prasun *ižī˜* and ****ʧak͡ɕman-***, O/YAv. *cašman*-, Khotan. *tceiʾman*-, M/NPers. *čašm* < **ćaćšman*-, cf. Ved. *cákṣman-*; similarly, ‘eyebrow’ is ****brū-*** YAv. *bruuat̰.biiąm*; Waigali *ačī-brǖ* < PIIr. **bʰruH*- (Ved. *bhrū́*-) < PIE **h₃bʰruH*- (cf. EWA 2,283), with derivatives PIr. ****brūkā-*** MPers. *blwk*, *brwg* brūg; Šuγn. *wruɣ* and ****brūʧī-***Sanglechi *vrīc*. For ‘ear’: ****(H)au̯š-***/***(H)uš-*** YAv. du. *uši* [ahuric], OP du. *uši*, MPers. *ʾwši(y)* oš(i), NPers. *hōš* < PIIr. **Hau̯š-*/**Huš-* < PIE **h₂ó/éu̯s-* ‘ear, hearing’, with derivative ****(H)au̯šaka-*** MPers. *hwšk*, *hwšg* hōšag; NPers. *xōša*. While this PIE inheritance in Iranian mostly developed the meaning ‘intelligence’, the (popular) PIIr. lexeme **gau̯ša-* OAv. *gə̄uša*-; YAv. *gaoša*-; OPers. *gauša*-; Parth., MPers. *gōš*; NPers. *gōš*; Yaghn. *ɣūš* kept its focus on the field of ‘(organ of) hearing’; and ****karna-*** YAv. *karəna-* [daēvic] < PIIr. **kárna*- (Ved. *kárṇa*-), used mostly to designate the anatomic organ ‘ear’, is well attested in continuants of the oxytone derivative **karná*- ‘having (marked) ears’, Ved. *karṇá*- ‘*aurītus*’; VS: ‘having long ears’ but often means ‘deaf’, e.g. in Sogd. *krn*, MPers. *kl*, ManMPers. *qr* karr, NPers. *kar(r)*.

Among the words for ‘mouth’, one finds the old *-r/n-* heteroclitic ****ʣafar*** < ****ʣap***/ ***bhar*** YAv. *zafarə*, MPers. *zpl* zafar, NPers. *zafar* vs. ****(°)ʣafan-*** YAv. *zafənəm*, especially in compounds: YAv. *θri*.-, *anu*.*zafan-* (but with the *-r-* stem, cf. YAv. *vīzafār-*); from MIr. on we meet ****kasman-*** ‘mouth’ Chwrsm. *kʾm* kām, NPers. *kām*, Oss. *kom*. Of the elements forming the mouth, the two words for ‘lip’, which elsewhere in the IE languages are found in complementary distribution, are both attested in Iranian: ****au̯šta-*** YAv. *aošta*-, Khotan. *auṣṭä* < **áu̯štha*- (Ved. *óṣṭha*-) and ****labi-*** Parth. *lb*; MPers. *lp*, *lb* lab; NPers. *lab*. The largely (tabuistically) varying PIE versions of the word for ‘tongue’ (and ‘language’) are preponderantly preserved in forms beginning with ****siʣu̯°***; thus, ****siʣu̯ā- ~ siʣuu̯-*** O/YAv. *hizuuā-*, Pamir languages (Šuγn., etc.) *ziv*, Pṣ̌t. *ž’əba*; cf. the *-n-* stem ****siʣu̯ān-*** OPers. *hạzān*-; Parth. *ʽzbʾn* izbān, *ʾwzwʾn*, *ʿzwʾn* uzwān, izwān; NPers. *zabān*, and (diminutive) derivatives such as ****siʣu̯āka-*** Alan. **(i)zvāki*, Oss. *ævzag* and ****siʣūka-*** ‘tongue’ Waxi *zik*. For ‘tooth; mouth’: ****gaštra-*** Chwrsm. *ɣš*, Pṣ̌t. *ɣāṣ*, Waxi *ɣˇaṣ* belongs as n. instr. ‘means of biting’ to the sphere of the verb ‘to bite’, as does ****gaʣa-*** MPers. *gc*-, *gz-ytn* gaz-īdan; NPers. *gaz*-, *gaštan*, and ****gāʣa-*** Zaz. *gāz* similar to the semantic variety within the family of PIE **g̑ ómbʰ-o-* (Gr. γόμφος ‘pin, nail’) > PIIr. **ȷ́ámbʰa-* > PIr. ****ʣamba-*** ‘tooth’ Khotan. *ysami*-*: *ysīmä* vs. coll. fem. ****ʣambā-***‘(row of) teeth’ Pṣ̌t. *z’āma*. Otherwise, the inherited word for ‘tooth’, ****dant-***, is omnipresent, both as heir of the old root-noun YAv. *daṇt*-, Yazgh. *δand* (*δān*) < PIIr. **(H)dánt*-/*(H)dat*- (Ved. *dánt*-) and in suffixal derivatives such as ****dantān-*** YAv. *daṇtān*-; Parth., MPers. *dndʾn* dandān; NPers. *dandān*; Sariqoli *δanda*/*un*, ****dantaka-***Khotan. *dandaa*-; Yaghn. *dindak*, and ****dantāka-*** Sogd. *dntʾk*, *dntʾ*; Oss. *dændag*. For ‘fang, canine tooth’ of both humans and animals (and beings of Zoroastrian mythology), the term ****anʦū˘r(a)-*** is used, YAv. *tiži.asūra*- (vs. *tiži.dąstra-* ‘with sharp tusks’ < ****danštra-*** ‘means of biting’); Sogd. *ʾnsʾwr*; *ʾswr ’*ansur; Digor *ænsur(æ)*; Iron *æssyr*. For ‘notch’, ‘corner of the mouth, cheek’, one finds ****sraxu̯a-*** Khotan. *rahā*, NPers. *rux* ‘cheek, face’, Sariqoli *rak* ‘forehead’, cf. Armen. *erax* ‘mouth, spout’ < PIIr. **sráku̯a*-(Ved. *srákva*- ‘tooth, fang’) ~ RV+ *sŕ̥kvan-* m. ‘(corner of the) mouth, lock-jaw’; TochB *särwāna* ‘face’. On the level of inherited phraseology, the IIr. collocation ‘TO GRIND UP THE [TWO] JAWS’ AVŚ *hánū … jambhaya* ~ YAv. *hąm ⁺zanauua zəmbaiiaδβəm* contains the word for ‘jaw, jowl’: ****ʣan(H)u-*** YAv. *⁺zanauua* [du.], Khot. *ysanuva*, Pṣ̌t. *z’əna* < PIIr. **ȷ́án(H)u*- (Ved. *hánu*- with irreg. *h-*, perhaps with already IIr. **ȷ́[ʰ]°*; analogy?) < PIE **g̑en(H)u-*; derivative ****ʣanuka-*** MPers. *dnwwg* danūg; Bal. *zanūk*, *zanīk*. The MIr.+ word for ‘chin’ is ****ʣanaxā-*** Parth. *znx* zanax, NPers. *zanax*; on the relationship between ‘chin’ and ‘knee’, see Narten 1969 [1970]). The inherited word for ‘neck’, ****grīu̯ā-*** YAv. *grīuuā-* (daēvic), shows various semantic transitions; on the one hand, with a *totum-pro-parte* specialization, to ‘mane’, as in Bulg., Russ. *gríva*, on the other, to ‘neck, throat’, as in MPers., Pahl. *glyw’* grīw, and even a *pars-pro-toto* generalization to ‘body, soul, self’, in ManMPers. *gry(y)w* and in Parth. *gryw* grīw. The special lexeme for ‘throat’ means also ‘neck’: ****garda-*** Sogd. *ɣrδʾ(kh)*, Chwrsm. *ɣrδk*.

5.1.2. For body limbs, Iranian presents the full range of words for ‘arm’: ****arma-*** Sogd. *‘pš-’rm’y* ‘with arms behind’; MPers., Npers. *arm* < PIr. ****Har(H)ma-*** < PIIr. **Hr̥Hmá-*(AV+ *īrmá*- ‘foreleg’) < PIE **h₂r̥H-mo-* and ****bāʣāu̯-***/****bāʣu-*** YAv. *bāzu-*; MPers. *bʾcʾy*, *bʾzʾw* bāzā(w); Parāči *båz* < PIIr. **bʰaHȷ́ʰú*- (Ved. *bāhú*-) < PIE **bʰeh₂g̑ʰu-*; on the common IIr. ritual term − and compositional type − YAv. *uz-bāzu-* ~ Ved. *úd-bāhu-*, cf. Sadovski (2001: 101). Its derivatives are ****bāʣuka-*** MPers. bāzūg, Khot. *bāysua-*, Digor *bazug*, Iron *bazyg*, the appurtenative > diminutive ****bāʣuna-*** ‘armlet’ KurdKurm. *basin*, as well as the word for ‘wing’, ****bāʣura-*** YAv. [*snāuuar*.]*bāzura*-, Alan. *bāzura*-, Bal. *bāzul* (also ‘arm’). The concurrent lexeme for ‘wing’ in NIr. is ****ʧanga-*** NPers. *čang*; Oss. *cong, cæng*-; Pṣ̌t. *cāng*.

The parts of the arm start with four PIE inherited words for ‘shoulder’: ****amsa-*** (> ***amha-***), perhaps Khotan. **ama*- (Emmerick − Skjærvø 1997: 153 f.); Digor *onæ*, *ionæ*; Iron *on* < PIIr. **Hámsa-* (Ved. *áṃsa-*), perhaps from PIE **h₃emso-*; ****ʦup/fti-*** YAv. *supti-*, Khot. *suta-*, MPers. *swpt’* suft, NPers. *suft*; based on instr.sg.: ***ʦufti̯ā-*** Digor *sufcæ*, *sifcæ*; Iron *syfc* < PIIr. **ćúpti-* (Ved. *śúpti-*) < PIE **(s)k̑up-ti-*; from PIE **sph₂-ii̯o-* > PIIr. **(s)pʰii̯á-* ‘shoulder-blade’ (Ved. *sphyá-*) > PIr. ****fii̯a-*** we possess only the derivative ****fii̯āka-*** ‘shoulder’ BuddhSogd. *byk*; Digor *fijjagæ*; Iron *fyjjag*, *fijag*; finally, ‘(upper/ fore-)arm, shoulder’: ****dau̯š-*** YAv. *daoš-*, MPers. *dwš* dōš, NPers. *dōš* < PIIr. **dauš-*(Ved. *dóṣ-*) < PIE **dous-*; derivative ****dau̯šikā-*** ‘upper arm’, perhaps in Pṣ̌t. *leča*. A fifth word of inner-Iranian provenience is NIr. ****āraʦa-*** Waigali *araš’a*. For ‘armpit; bay’, both ****kaša-*** YAv. *kaša*- and the prep. government compounds ****upa-* (/*api-*)*kaša-*** Sogd. *ʾpkš*; Yaghn. *kapaš* are of PIE origin < PIIr. **káćša-* (on prep. + *-kákṣa-* → cmpd. in *°kakṣá-*, cf. Sadovski 2000: 470) < PIE **k⁽ʷ⁾ók̑so-*/**-eh₂-*. Another archaism is ‘ulna; elbow’: ****araθni-*** YAv. *frārāθni*-, OPers. *ā˘rašni*-, Tati *arešni*, Waxi *arə́t* ‘elbow, ell’ < PIIr. **Haratní-*, RV+ *aratní*- vs. RV+ *ā́rtnī-* ‘elbow’; PIr. ****arθn-*** YAv. *arəθnå*, in NIr. cmpds. *-*ā˘r(θ)ni*- > Šuγn. *-ε̄rn*. ****ʧankada-*** ‘elbow’ (: ****ʧanga-*** ‘wing’ above) is reconstructed on the basis of YAv. *⁺ciṇkaδauuatō* and Pṣ̌t. *cang’əl*, cf. Morgenstierne (2003: 17). The continuant of the -*to-* derivative of the PIE word for ‘hand’ is ****ʣásta-*** O/YAv. *zasta*-; OPers. *dasta*-; M/NPers., Yaghn. *dast* < PIIr. **ȷ́ʰásta-* < PIE **g̑ʰés-to-*; its competitor, PIIr. **g⁽ʰ⁾ábʰasti-*, coexists in Ved. *gábhasti-* and PIr. ****gábasti-*** Khotan. *ggośtä*, *gauśta*; Waxi *gawust* ‘fist’; also perhaps ****gaba-*** MPers. *gw’* gaw, and YAv. *gauua-*‘hand’ (daēvic), if it stands for **gaβa-*. ‘Fist’ itself is PIr. = PIIr. ****mušti-*** (Ved. *muṣṭí-*) < PIE **mus-ti-* YAv. *mušti*-; Khotan. *muṣṭu*, NPers. *mušt*, KurdKurm. *mist*. For ‘palm’: ****(su-)pāni-*** Munji *p’ε̄no*, Waxi *pūn* could be a common PIIr. **pāní*- (Ved. *pāṇí*-) or a (substrate) LW (in Indic). On the family of ‘finger’, ****anguri-***, and ‘finger, thumb; toe’, ****angušta-***, see now Filippone (2010) with data on individual finger-names in Iranian.

In the domain of terminology for parts of the leg, (N)Ir exhibits a derivative of inherited ****pād-*** ‘foot’ in the value ‘leg’: ****padī-, padii̯ā-*** Yidgha *p’alo, pol’o, p’ō˘lo*; Munji *p’ālo*, *-a*; Waxi *paδ*. Limited to WNIr. is the variation ****nangā- ~* **langā-*** ‘foot, leg’ NPers. *lang*, KurdKurm. *ling*, Zaz. *ling*/*ning*. Of PIE origin are the lexemes for ‘hip’: ****ʦrau̯ni-*** YAv. *sraoni*-; Khotan. *ṣṣūni**, *ṣūñä* beside *ṣṣūñi*, *ṣūñvā*/*ṣūñyā*; NPers. *surūn* < PIIr. **ćráu̯ni-* (Ved. *śróṇi-*, cf. the identical collocation in the cmpd. ‘broadhipped’, Ved. *pr̥thú-śroṇi-* = YAv. *pərəθu.sraoni-*) < PIE **k̑lou̯ni-* and for ‘thigh’: ****ūrú-***YAv. **uruca* and *spitii-uru*-, Khotan. *hurā* < PIIr. **uHrú-* (Ved. *ūrú-*), PIE **uh₂-ru-*/ **u̯eh₂-ru-*, (cf. Lat. *vārus* ‘bow-legged’) and ****saxt(i)-*** OAv. du. *haxtiiå*, YAv. *haxti*, MPers. *haxt*, Oss. *aɣd* < PIIr. **sáktH-* (Ved. *sákthi-*) < PIE **sokʷtH-i-* (Lubotsky, To appear). An Iranian innovation is the semantic specialization of ****patištāna-*** (*)‘support’ → ‘thigh’ YAv. *paitištāna*-, Sogd. *pčtʾn*, Pṣ̌t. *pat’un*. Concerning the word for ‘knee’, beside Narten (1969 [1970]), see Nussbaum (1986) on its IE ablaut patterns: Ir. ****ʣānu-~ ʣnu-*** YAv. *zānu* ~ *ā žnubiiascit̰* ‘up to the knees’ (vs. cmpds. *fra-šnu*-, *ā-xšnu*-, cf. Sadovski 2000: 466 and 472), Bal. *zān*, Šuγn. *zůn*; with derivative ****ʣānuka-*** Parth. *zʾnwg* (> Pahl. *zʾnwk*’ zānūg), ManMPers. *dʾnwg* dānūg, NPers. *zānū*; and, with zero grade, ****ʣnūka-*** MPers. *šnwk*, *ʽšnwg* šnūg. Regarding ****asʧīu̯a-*** ‘knee joint?’ YAv. *ascuua*- ‘shank, shin’ < **ascīua-*, Lubotsky (2002) reconstructs PIIr. **Hast-(s)čiHua-* ‘shank, shin’ (>→ Ved. *aṣṭhīvánt-* ‘id.’) < PIE **h₃est-* + *(s)kiHu-*. Inherited is the well-attested ****pāršnā-*** ‘heel’ YAv. *pāšnā-*, Khotan. *pārrā*-, Pṣ̌t. *pṣa* < PIIr. **pāršnaH-* with derivative ****pāršnaka-*** MPers. *pʾšnk* pāšnag, NPers. *pāšna*; also ****pāršni-*** Munji *p’āngyo*, Yidgha *p’äṇio*, etc. < PIIr. **pā́ršni-* (Ved. *pā́rṣṇi-*) ←< PIE **t(s)pērsneh₂-* (Lubotsky 2006 and To appear) as well as the lexical innovation ****na***/***ipərku-*** ‘heel, sole’ Sariqoli *naburg*. Finally, the semanteme of ‘hoof’ is represented by two word-families: ancient ****ʦafa-***YAv. *safa-*, Khotan. *sahä*, Pṣ̌t. *swa* (< ****[s]ʦafa-***) < PIIr. **sćapHá-* (Ved. *śaphá-*) < PIE **skepHo-*/*skopHo-* with derivative ****ʦafatakā-*** Oss. *sæftæg* and inner-Iranian ****ʦumba-***MPers. *swmb* sumb, NPers. *sumb* with derivative ****ʦumbaka-***, Iranian LW in Armen. *smbak*, perhaps related to the verb MP *swmb-* sumb, *swptn* suftan ‘to bore, pierce’ (cf. Waxi *sərv* ‘hole, cavity’ < PIr. **subra-* < PIIr. **ću̯abʰra-/ćubʰra-*), the ‘hoof’ being here defined from the pragmatic viewpoint of horse-breeders.

5.1.3. Regarding the Iranian terminology for the internal organs, the following paragraphs will display some lexical highlights according to the individual biological systems of the organism; on the corresponding secretions or body fluids, see 5.1.4.

Starting with the nervous system and notions like ‘brain’ and ‘spinal cord’ (on ****pəršti-*** ‘backbone’, see above), a common denotation for ‘brain(s)’ is ****mastərgan-***/°***gn-***YAv. *mastərəɣnas-ca*, MPers. *mstlg* mastarg, Wanetsi *mastr’āɣze*, Orm. *mastə́rγ*, Pṣ̌t. *mast’arɣay* [Pers. LW?] < PIIr. **mastr̥gʰan- / mastr̥ǰʰan-* (AVP+ *mastr̥han-*); on possible PIE **mest-(m)r̥gʰ-n-*, see Lubotsky (To appear).

The frequent designations of the concepts of ‘brain’ and ‘marrow’ by the same word provide a bridge to the semantic field of the musculoskeletal system: derivatives of both IIr. **mastr̥gʰ/ǰʰan-* and its variant **mast(i)-* stand also for ‘marrow’, so e.g. ****mastaka-***Khotan. *māstaa*-, Parāči *mhastō*/*u* and ****mazga-*** ‘marrow, core, brain’ YAv. *mazga*-, MPers. *mazg*, Sogd. *mɣz*-, Pṣ̌t. *māɣz’ə ~ māzɣ’ə* < PIIr. **masgʰa-* < PIE **mosgʰo-*(< **mostgʰo-*, cf. Lubotsky, To appear) ~ PIE **mosgʰ-en-* > PIIr. **masǰ⁽ʰ⁾án-* (Ved. *majján-*, with loss of aspiration regular in **žǰʰ*, Lubotsky 2001: 39) > PIr. ****mazʤan-***‘marrow’ Khotan. *mäjsā*, *mijsā*. The PIE lexemes for ‘bone’ are continued by ****(H)ast-***O/YAv. *ast*-, M/NPers. *ast* < PIIr. **Hást(H)-* (Ved. *ásthi-*) < PIE **h₃estH-*, with derivatives ****(H)astaka-*** Sogd. *ʾstkʾ*, *ʾstk* əstak-; Chwrsm. *ʼsty˘k ʼ*astəg; Khotan. *āstai*, *āstaa-*; Oss. *æstæg* and ****(H)astai̯na-*** ‘osseous, made of bone’ YAv. *astaēna*-, MPers. astēn. The basic word for ‘rib’ shows old ablaut ****parʦu-***/****pərʦu-*** YAv. *parəsui*, *pərəsu-*; Waxi *pürs* < **párću*- (*párśu*-) < PIE **perk̑-u-*, with derivatives of both vowel grades, viz. ****parʦukā-***MPers. *pʾhlwk* pahlūg, KurdKurm. *pʰarsû* and ****pərʦukā-*** Digor *færskʾæ*, Pṣ̌t. *puṣṭ’əy*. Terms relating to the muscular system normally designate its “products” as well; thus, ****snāu̯ar***, ***snāu̯an-*** < ****snáHu̯ar*** means ‘tendon’ (also ‘sinew’, 7.6) YAv. *snāuuarə°*, Digor *nawær* < PIIr. **snáHu̯ar-*/*snáHu̯an-* (Ved. *snā́van-* ‘sinew’), PIE **s(h₂)neh₁u̯r̥-*/*-un-*; and ****māns(a)-*** ‘meat’ < PIIr. **mānsá-*, **mās-* (Ved. *māṃsá-*, *māṃs°*, *mā́s-*) < PIE **mēms-(o-)*, *mēs-* pragmatically stands for ‘muscle mass’, beside the specialized ****dərbda-*** ‘bundle of muscles’ YAv. *dərəβδa-* < PIIr. **darbʰ-* ‘to tie in a bundle’.

Within the integumentary system, ‘skin’ is designated as ‘cover’: ****pau̯astā-*** OPers. *pavastā*- ‘clay cover-film’; MPers. *pwst’*, *pwst* post; Sogd. *pwst*(*h*); NPers. *post* < PIIr. **pau̯ástā˘-* (Ved. *pavásta-* ‘cover’) and, more widely, as ****ʧarman-*** ‘hide, leather’ YAv. *carəman*-, OPers. *carman*-, Khot. *tcārman-* < PIIr. **čárman-* (Ved. *cárman-*) < PIE **(s)ker-men-*. ‘Leather (± made of goatskin?)’ is called ****(H)iʣai̯na-*** YAv. *izaēna*- vs. PIr. ****(H)aʣina*-** YAv. *azina-uuaṇt-* < PIIr. **Haȷ́ína-* ‘hide, skin’ (Ved. *ajína-*) < PIE **h₂eg̑ - ino-*. The numerous words for ‘hair’ (collective and singulative) include common IE heritage like ****rau̯man-*** NPers. *rōm* < PIIr. **Hraúman-* (Ved. *r/lóman-*) < PIE **Hreumen-*; ****u̯arʦa-*** YAv. *varəsa*-, ChrSogd. *wrs* < PIIr. **u̯áRća-* (Ved. *válśa-* ‘sprout’) < PIE **uolk̑o-*; and (MIr.+) ****drau̯a-*** BuddhSogd. *ẓw*-, Yaghn. *diraw*; of inner-IIr. distribution is ****gai̯ʦa-*** YAv. *gaēsa*-, M/NPers. *gēs* (~ PIr. ***kai̯ʦa-*?** Waigali *kyeċ, kēċ*, Kati *keċ*-) < PIIr. **g/kaíca*- (Ved. *kéśa*-; *g*/*k* alternation implies a substrate word?) with derivative ****gai̯ʦaka-*** Khotan. *ggīsaa*-. The connotations ‘hair; color’ co-exist in ****gau̯na-*** (Morgenstierne 1974: 25 [deriv. of ‘cow’?]) YAv. *gaona*-, Khotan. *ggūna*-, Pṣ̌t. *ɣūná* < PIIr. **gauná-* (Ved. *guṇá-*, Lubotsky [p.c.]: Iranian LW in Indic). Beside the metonymic uses of words for ‘neck’ (see above), the concept of ‘mane’ is expressed by inner-Iranian ****bəršti-*** Alan. **βarčya*, Digor *barcæ*, Iron *barc*. Instead of PIIr. **smáćru-* (Ved. *śmáśru-*) ‘beard’, (N)Ir. uses continuants of ****upās(a)nā-*** Šuγn. *bůn* and ****fragai̯si̯a-*** Waxi *rɣˇiṣ*. The IE word family for ‘nail, claw’ (of fingers and toes) includes ****naxa-*** Digor *nix*, Iron *nyx* < PIIr. **(H)nā˘kHá-*, Ved. *nakhá-* (or ← r.-n. ****nāx*-/*nax-*** < PIE **h₃negʰ-*) and various innovations, such as (transponat) ****nāxun-*** Parth. *nʾxwn*, MPers. *nʾhwn* nāxun, NPers. *nāxun*, ****nagnū-*** KurdKurm. *neynuk*, Zaz. *nengū* (related to a ****nagra-*?** Talishi *nangыr*), ****naxara-*(*ka-*)** Sanglechi *narxōk*, ****naxau̯ara-*?** Sariqoli *našɛwr*. In Iranian, ‘fat, grease’, as bodily substance and as product, is ****ʧarpa-*** Sogd. *crp*, M/NPers. *čarb*, Oss. *carv*.

In the designations of organs of the respiratory system, for the meaning ‘lungs’ the word-family of YAv. *suši* (du.), Khot. *suv’ä*, M/NPers. *suš* ‘lung’, Oss. *sus*/*sos* (< PIIr. **ću̯as* ‘to hiss, pant’ < **u̯es*) replaces PIIr. **plaumán-* ‘lung’ (Ved. *klomán-*) < PIE **pleu-mon-*; for the semanteme ‘chest, breast’, the old word for ‘extensiveness; wide space’, ****u̯aras-*** YAv. *varas-*; MPers. *wl*, *wr* war; NPers. *bar* < PIIr. **Hu̯árHas-* (Ved.*váras-* ‘id.’) < PIE **h₁uerH-es-*, is used, just as is ****u̯axšaka-*** Digor *wæsqæ*, *usqæ*; Iron *wæxsk*; whereas ****fštāna-*** YAv. *fštāna*-, MPers. *f*/*pistān*, NPers. *pistān* expands into the field ‘breast, nipple, teat’ < PIIr. **pstána-* (Ved. *stána-*) < PIE **psten-*.

Closely connected to this word-field are the terms for organs of the circulatory system. ‘heart’: ****ʣārd-***/****ʣərd-*** O/YAv. *zərəd*-, Parth. *zyrd*, MPers. *dyl* dil, NPers. *dil*, with derivative ****ʣərdai̯a-*** YAv. *zərəδaiia*-, BuddhSogd. *δrẓy(h)*, ManSogd. *δrjyy*, Oss. *zærdæ*. Specific Iranian derivatives of an older root show up in ‘blood’: ****u̯asun-*** YAv. *vohun*-, Talishi *xün*; cf. ****u̯asu-*** in YAv. *vaŋhu-tāt-* ‘blood’, *vaŋhuθβa-* ‘bloodshed’; VS+ *vásā-*‘(melted) fat’ < PIIr. **u̯ás-aH-*; for ****tau̯ka-*** ‘bud, blood’, see 4.1. ‘Spleen’: ****spərʣan-***YAv. *spərəzan-*; MP *spwrz* spurz, *spwł* spul (< SWIr. **spr̥dan-*); Yidgha *spərzə*. In the word-field ‘blood vessels’, cf. ****rasā-*** ‘vein’ YAv. *raŋhā*- ‘river Rasā, Ved. *Rasā́-*’; with derivative ****rasakā-*** > **rahakā-*, MPers. *lhk*, *lk*, *rg* rahg > *rag* (=NPers.); Khot. *rrā* [pl.] < PIIr. **Hrása-* (Ved. *rása-*) ‘sap, juice (of plants), liquid, essence’.

The inventory of organ names of the digestive system contains, first, general terms for ‘intestine(s)’ of animals and humans, such as ‘entrails, innards’ (also as products): ****ruθu̯ar/n*-** YAv. *uruθβarǝ*, *uruθβąn* < PIIr. **(H)rutu̯ar-*, *(H)rutu̯an-* ‘intestine(s)’ and, with another suffixation and ablaut grade, MIr.+ ****rau̯tā˘*-** ‘gut, intestine(s); string’ MPers. *lwt* rōd, Bal. *rōt*, Yaghn. *ruta*, with derivative ****rau̯tīka-*** MPers. *lwtyk* rōdīg, KurdKurm. *ruvī* and ****rau̯taka-*** Chwrsm. *rwdk* rōdg, NPers. *rōda*. The IE name of the ‘liver’ is continued by PIIr. **(H)iákr̥-*, *(H)iakn-* (Ved. *yákr̥-t* / *yakn- V´-*) > PIr. ****(H)i̯akar*, *(H)i̯akan-***YAv. (*yākarə*/) *yakarə*, MP *ykl* ǰagar, Bal. *ǰagar*, Yidgha *yēɣən* and, specifically in Pamir languages, ****θātā-*?** Šuγn. *θōd*, Yazgh. *θed*.

Terms for organs of the urogenital system include concepts like ‘kidney’, ****u̯ərdka-***YAv. *vərəδka*-, Khot. *bilga-*, Waxī *wultk* < PIIr. **u̯r̥tká-* (Ved. *vr̥kká-*); ‘urethra’: ****mai̯ʣakā-*** Digor *mesgæ*, Iron *mizg*; ~ PIr. **(H)miz-* < PIIr. **Hmiȷ́ʰ-* (Ved. *meh*/*mih*) < PIE **h₃meig̑ ʰ-* ‘to urinate’. Of the reproductive system, beside PIr. ****gərda-*** ‘penis’ YAv. *gərəδa-* in *gərəδō.kərəta-* ‘cutting off the genitals?’, limited to PIIr. < **gr̥dá-* (Ved. *gr̥dá-*), Iranian shows various innovations like ****gura-*** ‘testicle/penis’ Šuγn. *ɣur*, Yazgh. *ɣər*, or the fem. derivative ****dumā-*** ‘vulva’ Šuγn., Bartangī *δam*, apparently the *-ā-*stem counterpart of ****duma-* / *dumba-*** ‘tail’; ‘penis’, on which see 5.1.1 above.

5.1.4. Logically correlated to the designations of organs is the word-field ‘body fluids, secretions’. Cornerstones of the inherited vocabulary here are words like ‘tear’, ****(H)aʦru-*** YAv. *asru*-, MPers *ʾls* ars (=NPers.), KurdKurm. *asr ~ hêsir* < PIIr. **Háćru*-(Ved. *áśru*-) < **h₂ek̑ru-*, with derivative ****(H)aʦruka-*** Chwrsm. *ʾšwk* əššūg, Khotan. *āṣkä*, NPers. *ašk*, Waxi *yaṣk*. ‘Milk’, both human and of animals, is ****xšīra-*** MPers. *šyl*, *šyr* šīr (= NPers.); Munji *xšī́ro* < ePIr. ****xšiHrá-***, limited to PIIr., **kšiHrá-* (Ved. *kṣīrá-*), as is perhaps ‘milk, buttermilk’ ****pai̯as-*** YAv. *paiiah*-, Munji *p’ayo* < PIIr. **pái̯Has-*(Ved. *páyas-* ‘milk; juice, sperm, life-sap’) < PIE **peiH-os-*. Well established within IE is the lexeme for ‘sweat’: PIr. ****su̯ai̯da-*** YAv. *xᵛaēδa*- (Jamison 2011[2015]), MPers. *hwyd* xwēy, Chwrsm. *ʾxyδ*, Yazgh. *xˇʷiδ* < PIIr. **su̯ái̯da-* (Ved. *svéda-*), a derivative of PIIr. **su̯ai̯d*/**su̯id-* ‘to sweat’ < PIE **su̯ei̯d*/**su̯id-* ‘id.’. The Iranian words for ‘urine’ coincide in part with those for ‘urethra’ (5.1.3.); thus, ****mai̯ʣaka-*** Khotan. *mīysai*, Bal. *mēzag*, appurtenative derivative of ****mai̯ʣa-*** < PIIr. **Hmai̯ȷ́ʰa-*, cf. Ved. *á-meha-* ‘retention of urine’; others contain the semantics of ‘means for washing’ typical of IIr., cf. ****mūθra-*** ‘urine’ OAv. *mūθra*- < PIIr. **múHtra*- (Ved. *mū́tra*-) < PIE **muH-tro-*, n. instr., similar to PIE **muH-dlo-* > PSlav. **mūdla-* > Cz. *mýdlo*, Russ. *mylo* ‘soap’ (~ *myt’* etc.‘to wash’). Among the expressions for ‘excrement’, ****gūθā˘-*** < ePIr. ****guHϑHa-*** YAv. °*gūθa*-, MPers. *gwh* gūh (= NPers.), Yaghn. *ɣūt* corresponds to Skt. *gūtha-* in *karṇagūtha-* ‘ear-wax’ < PIIr. **guHtHa-* < PIE **g⁽ʷ⁾uH-tHo-*, perhaps related to the word for ‘cow’; NIr. possesses ****ʦakan(a)-*** Ormuri *(ə)skan* or develops euphemisms and metaphors like ****gau̯-riša-*** ‘cow dung’ and ****dərti-*** ‘dung’. Isolated is ****sixra-***, ‘liquid feces’ YAv. *hixra-*.

5.2. Gender, sex, procreation, birth: In 4.1. we mentioned the affinity of the semantic fields of ‘(human) seed’, ‘*genus*’ and ‘descent, origin, nature’ in relation to the PIr. lexemes ****ʧiθra-*, **ʧiθraka-***,****bīʣaka-***, and ****tau̯xman-*** together with its derivative ****tau̯xmaka-***. MPers. *twhmk*, *twhmg* tōhmag means ‘seed; extended family’, as does ****tau̯xmii̯aka-*** in Bactr. *τοχμιγο*. The “gender” words such as ‘female, woman’, ****ʤáni-***, ****strī- ~* **str̥i̯ā-***, ****strīʧī-***/***strīkā-***, and ****i̯au̯šā***, ***i̯au̯šan-***, as well as ‘girl’, ****kanii̯ān-***, ***kanīn-*** < ePIr. ****kaniHan-***/***kaniHn-***, with its derivative ****kanii̯akā-*** and ****kanīʧī-***, have been discussed in 4.2., as were the semantic fields ‘man’ and ‘male’, centering around ****nar-***and ****nari̯a-***, ****ʣana-***, ****dasa-***, and ****əršān-*** ‘male, bull, stallion’. Another PIE term, **u̯iH-ro-*, is preserved rather in the axiologically marked meaning ‘man, hero’: PIr. ****u̯īrá-*** O/ YAv. *vīra*-; MPers. *wyl, wyyr* wīr; Yaghn. *vir **<*** PIIr. **u̯iHrá-* (Ved. *vīrá-*).

The technical term for ‘pregnant’, ****āpuθra-*** MPers. *ʾpws, ʾbwws* ābus; NPers. *ābis*; Bal. *āpus*, is an old bahuvrīhi-compound of the *éntheos* type, originally meaning ‘having a little one (young animal / human child, PIIr. **putrá- <* PIE **putló-*) “at” (one’s body, etc.)’. For ‘birth’, one finds various derivatives of the root PIr. ****ʣan(H)*** < PIIr. **ȷ́anH-<* PIE **g̑ enh₁-*, cf. v. adj. ****ʣāta-*** ‘born’ YAv. *zāta-*, Chwrsm. *zʾd*, Bactr. *ζαδο* < **ȷ́aHtá-*< PIE **g̑ n̥h₁-to-*; thus, the n. act./abstr. in *-ti-*, ****ʣāti-*** Sogd. *zʾt* zāt, Chwrsm. *ʾw-zʾ*, and in *-tu-*, ****ʣantu-*** Av. *zaṇtu*- ‘*birth-place, region’ < PIIr. **ȷ́anHtu-*, as well as ****ʣanθra-***YAv. *ząθra*- and ****ʣanθa-*** O/YAv. *ząθa*- < ****ʣan(H)tha-***. This last word is the derivational basis of the lexeme for ‘descendant’: ****ʣanθaka-***/***ʣanhaka-*** Parth. *zhg*, *zẖg*; MPers. *zhk*, *zʾhk*, *zhg* zahag; Bal. *zahg*; cf. with a diff. suffix ****ʣanaka-*** MPers. *zng* zanag, Bactr. *ζαγγο*, Oss. *zænæg* < **ȷ́anHaka-* ‘descendant, species, kind’. As a transition to the next section, the concept ****nišā-*** ‘birthmark’, e.g. Šuγn. *naɣˇ*, and ‘distinctive feature’ (of a *gens*, especially between the members of a [hero’s/royal] family, etc.) is of relevance both in (folklore) genealogy and in the context of popular medicine-and-magic related to birth.

5.3. Health, diseases, medicine, medicaments: The leading expression for ‘healthy’ in Iranian is ****druu̯a-*** YAv. *druua*-, Bactr. *λρουο* < PIIr. **dʰruHá-* (Ved. *dhruvá*- ‘fixed, firm’), with derivative ****druu̯aka-*** BuddhSogd. *δrʾwk*; Bactr. *λρογο*, *λρουγο*, *δδρογο*. The abstr. ‘health’, ****druu̯atāt-*** YAv. *druuatāt*-; Sogd. *δrwth*, *δrwtʾtwh*, is personified in the Avesta into one of the main Zoroastrian divinities, one of the Aməṣ̌a Spəṇtas. The opposite meaning ‘ill, sick’, is displayed, e.g., in ****bazda-*** YAv. *bazda*- which, if from PIIr. **bʰadzdʰá*- (Ved. *baddhá*-) (with archaic *-zd-* preserved, unlike in *basta-*, where the productive **-ta-*suffix has been restored), shows the connotation ‘bound, fettered’ (by a [demon of] disease, etc.), also in ‘foul, rotten’: ****pūta-*** Khotan. *puva*-, Digor *fud*, Iron *fyd*, with derivative ****pūtaka-*** MPers. *pwtk* pūdag. The inherited PIIr. word for ‘sickness, suffering, disease, illness’ is **HámH-u̯a-* YAv. *amaiiauuā-* (cf. Ved. *ámīvā-*); in PIr. cf. also ****nai̯ʣa-*** YAv. *naēza*-, Sogd. *nʾyz-kyn*; KurdKurm. *nēz*, Digor *nez*, Iron *niz*. Also of Iranian diffusion is ****darta-*** ‘pain’ MPers. *dlt’*, *drd* dard (= NPers.); Chwrsm. *δrd*; Bactr. *λαρ-σο*; Zaz. *derd*. The generic (inner-)Iranian concept of ‘wound’ is ****ʤanθma(n)-***Parth. *jxm*; MPers. *ztm*, *zʾhm* zahm, zaxm; NPers. *zaxm*. As an instance of a specific suffering, the Ir. lexeme for ‘blind’, ****(H)anda-*** YAv. *aṇda*-, Sogd. *ʾnt* and, Ormuri *ond*, continues the PIIr. **Handʰá-* (Ved. *andhá-* ‘blind, dark’) < PIE **h₂endʰo-*.

With regard to pharmaka, positive or negative, the concept of ‘means of killing, poison’ is expressed by a n. instr. ****ʤanθra-*** OAv. **jąθra*- → *paitī*.*ająθrəm*; Parth. *jhr* žahr; MPers. *zʾhl*, *zhr* zahr (= NPers.); KurdKurm. *žahr*/*jeʾr* with derivative ****ʤanθraka-***‘poison, gall’ MPers. *zʾhlk’*, *zhlk’* zahrag; NPers. *zahra*. On the other side of the scale, the notion ‘healing, remedy’ is inherent in the root O/YAv. *°biš-*. From this is built a noun for ‘healer, “medicine man”’, PIIr. **bʰišáȷ́-* (Skt. *bhiṣáj-*) and its derivatives, PIr. ****bišāʣa-*** MPers. *byšʾc*, *byšʾz* bišāz, ****bišaʣ-ka-*** OPers. **bišadka*-; Parth. *bzyšk* bizešk; NPers. *bizišk*, *pezešk*; Tājik. *pizišk*, as well as the vr̥ddhi-derivative ****bai̯šaʣa-*** ‘healing; neut.: remedy’ YAv. *baēšaza*-; MPers. *byš(ʾ)z*, *byšʾc*, *byšʾz* bēšā˘z < PIIr. **bʰai̯šaȷ́-á-*, Ved. *bheṣajá-*. Note also the n. instr. ‘means of purification’: ****bixθra-*** YAv. *bixəδra*- < PIIr. **bʰig-tra*- (cf. Milizia 2012). On the Avestan and Middle Iranian Zoroastrian medical tradition, see Sohn (1996) and, more recently, Delaini (2014); cf. also Hovelaque (1875), Casartelli (1886), Verrier (1887), Fichtner (1924), and Bana (1951).

## 6. Personal and family life

6.1. Individual; identity, personality: For the 1ˢᵗ pers. sg. of the personal pronoun ‘I’, Iranian, like most IE languages, displays continuants of inherited ****aʣám*** OAv. *azə̄m*, YAv. *azəm*; OPers. *adam*; Tumshuq. *asu*, *azu*; Prasun *unjū*, *unzū* < PIIr. **Haȷ́ʰam* (Ved. *ahám*) < PIE **h₁eg̑ h₂-om* and ****aʣā́*** CtrNE (Kašani, Farizandi, Natanzi) *äzä*, Pṣ̌t. *zə*, Munji *za*, PIIr. **Haȷ́ʰā́* < **°-aH* < PIE **h₁eg̑ -óh₍₂₎* (Gr. ἐγώ, etc.), both of which represent univerbations of elements such as PIE **-óm* and **-é*/*óh₍₂₎* with a stem **h₁eg̑-*. In at least one case, namely OAv. *as-cīt̰* (beside OAv. *azə̄*), Iranian seems to continue this stem without a second element, i.e., as if we had PIr. ****áʣ*** < PIIr. **Háȷ́ʰ*. However, the situation is not completely clear because of the hapax status of this form, and an alternative interpretation would work with a vowel loss or secondary ablaut in the particle sequence PIIr. **Haȷ́ʰ-H-ča*. ‘(Of) me, mine’ is PIIr. ****mana*** Bactr. *μανο* < PIIr. gen.**Hma-na* < PIE **h₁me+ne*, cf. OCS gen. *mene*. There are several words for ‘oneself’, standing for various original case-forms or derivatives of the stem PIr. = PIIr. ****su̯a-*** < PIE **su̯e-*, namely ****su̯ai̯*** Digor *xe*, Iron *xi*, ****su̯atā˘ka-*** Chwrsm. *xdʾk*, *xdʾc*; Digor *xʷædæg*, and ****su̯atas*** YAv. *xᵛatō*; MPers. *hwt’*, *xwd* xʷad; Parth. *wxd* xʷad; Bactr. *χοαδο*; Digor *xwæd*-; Waxi *xˇat*. Pronominal adjectives expressing the notion ‘same, identical’ (and then functioning as derivational bases for abstracts like ‘identity’) are ****sama-*** Bactr. *υαμο* with derivative ****samaka-*** Bactr. *υαμγο*. Prominent among the terms for ‘shape; face’, close to the notion of ‘person(ality), identity, individuality’, are ****ʧiθra-*** ‘clear, visible; shape, appearance, face; phenomenon’ and ****rau̯das-*** ‘face, etc.’ (5.1).

Group identity and otherness are primarily denoted by personal pronouns and pronominal adjectives such as ****asma-*** ‘us’ OAv. *ahm*, YAv. *ahma*, Khotan. *maha*, Parāči *mâ*, with derivative ****asmākam*** ‘our’ YAv. *ahmākəm*; OPers. *amāxam*; Bactr. *αμαχο*, *μαχο*; Oss. *max* and ****asmāʧi̯a-*** Wanetsi *moš*; Ishk. *mьš*, *miš*; Sanglechi *mič*; the opposed notion is ‘other’, in the appurtenative pronominal adjectives ****ani̯a-*** OAv. *ańiia*-; YAv. *ańiia-*/*ainiia*-; OPers. *aniya*-; Khotan. *añä*, *aña*; Tumshuq. *añi*; Yaghn. *áni*, *ánĕ* with derivatives ****ani̯aka-*** Bactr. *(α)νιγο* as well as ****antara-*** YAv. *aṇtara*-; Bactr. *ανδαρο*; Oss. *ændær* with ****antāra-*** Munji *yudū́r*, Wanetsi *nor*.

6.2. Family and relatives

6.2.1. The affinity between the domain of ‘body parts related to birth and growing’ and ‘family, relatives’ is expressed in the meanings ‘navel, umbilical cord’ and ‘(extended) family, *gens*’ of the continuants of PIr. ****nāf-***/***nāfah-*** (5.1.1[end]), as well as in the common semantemes ‘seed’ and ‘extended family’ of a series of inherited lexemes, e.g. ****tau̯xmii̯aka-*** (5.2). Derivatives of the first-mentioned base provide one of the semantic paths to arrive at the notion of ‘relative’: ****nāfii̯a-*** YAv. *nāfiia-*; Pṣ̌t. *nuy*, *nyāy*, cf. also the idea of ‘next of kin’ as ‘next on navel’, ****nabā-nazdišta-*** YAv. *nabā-nazdišta*-, continued in MPers. *nbʾnzdšt’*, PIIr. **nábʰā názdištha*- (Ved. *nā́bhānédiṣṭha*-).

Beside the metonymic use of various terms for ‘house, home’ (cf. also 6.4.) to designate the ‘(extended) family’, in NIr. the meaning ‘household, family’ is also characteristic of the semantic range of ****kāra-*** Pṣ̌t. *kor* (otherwise also ‘people’, esp. ‘army’, OPers. *kāra-*, derivative in MP *kārīk* ‘warrior’) and in Pamir languages is even individualized as ‘man’, Šuγn. *čōr*, Xufi *čůr*. Adjectives like ‘belonging to the house/home, domestic’ as nouns also adopt the meaning ‘head of the household (> *hus-band*)’. This is seen above all with ****dmānii̯a(ka)-*** YAv. *nmāniia*-, OPers. *māniya*-, MPers. *mānīg*; cf. Pṣ̌t. *m’ena*, f. Various innovations such as Iranian ****abik͡ ɕai̯θnī-*** denote the ‘lady of the house’, NIr.: Digor *æfsijnæ*, Iron *fsīn*, beside the ancient term ****dmāna-paθnī-*** ‘wife; mistress’ YAv. *dəmąnō.paθnī-*, *nmānō*.*paθnī-*; with the same second term, Iranian continues an old (euphemistic) IIr. compound for ‘concubine’, ****sa-paθnī-*** YAv. *ha-paθnī-*, Šuγn. *abīn*, Xufi *abēn* < PIIr. **sa-pátniH-* (Ved. *sapátnī-*), PIE (transponat) **sm̥-pót-n-ih₂-*, with derivative ****sa-paθn-ānʧī-*** Sogd. *pnānč*. For ‘widow’ we find PIr. ****u̯idau̯ā-***YAv. *viδauuā*- (in n.sg. *vaδu viδauua* ‘widow[ed] bride’) < PIIr. **Hu̯idʰ(H)áu̯aH-* (Ved. *vidhávā-*), with derivatives ****u̯idau̯aka-*** MPers. *wdpk’* wēwag, NPers. *bēwa* and ***u̯idau̯a-ʧī-*** Oss. *idædz*.

6.2.2. The series of principal family members opens with the inherited stem for ‘mother’, ****mātar-***/***māθr-***, with usual n.sg. ****mātā*** YAv. *mātar*-, *māta*; OPers. cmpd. *ha-mātar*-; MPers. *mādar*, *mād*; Khotan. *māta*, *mātaru*, *merä*; Tumshuq. *māḏar*-; NPers. *mādar*; Bal. *māt*. The stem allomorphs for ‘father’ in PIr. are ****pitar-***/****ptar-***/****fθr-*** (~****piθr-***), n.sg. ****pita***, all of them in OAv. *ptarə̄m*, *fəδrō*, *piθrē*, n.sg. *(p)tā*; YAv. *pita*/*ptā*°, *pitarəm*; OPers. *pitā*, *piça*; Sogd. *(ʾ)ptr-y*, *ptr-*, *pṯr-ptar-*; NPers. *pidar*; Bal. *pit*, *pis(s)*; Digor *fidæ*; Iron *fyd*. The development of the consonant clusters in the Iranian word for ‘father’ (and ‘daughter’; for both, cf. G. Schmidt 1973) is decisive for the reconstruction of the treatment of complex clusters of consonants + laryngeal of the type *CHCC(*-́*)* in correlation with the position of the accent. Its derivative ‘father’s brother’: ****ftəru̯ii̯a-*** YAv. *tūiriia*-< PIIr. **pHtr̥u̯ia-* (Ved. *pitr̥vya-*) sometimes means ‘(hostile) relative’.

6.2.3. The direct vertical line of descent is represented by various inherited words for ‘child’: PIr. ****puθra-*** ‘son’ O/YAv. *puθra*-, OPers. *puça*-, Sogd. °*pδr p(ə)š*-, MPers. *pws* pus → *pwsl*, Waxi *pətr* (in Avestan, *hunu-* ‘son’ < PIIr. **suHnú-*, Ved. *sūnú-*, is a strictly daēvic concept, but in OIran., PN **hūnu-* has the generic meaning ‘son’) with derivative ****puθra-ka-*** ‘(little) son’ Sogd. °*pyδrʾk* °pəθrē, °*pšyy* °pšē; Bal. *pussag*; PIr. ****dugdar-***/ ****dugdr- ~* **duxtar-***/***duxθr-***, n.sg. ***dugdā*** ‘daughter’ OAv. *dugədar-*/*dugədr-*; YAv. *duɣδar*-/*duɣδr*- < **-gd-*, with Bartholomae’s law; Bactr. λογδα, λογδο < **-gd-*/*-xt-* vs. productively formed OPers. **duxtar*-, **duxtā*; MPers. *dwht*, *dwxt* duxt, *dwhtl* duxtar; NPers. *duxt*, *duxtar* < PIIr. **dʰugʰdʰā́*/*dʰuǰʰitr-* (Ved. *duhitár-*) < PIE **dʰugh₂-ter-*; with marked fem. derivation: ****duxθrī-*** ‘daughter, virgin; princess’ OPers. *duxçī*-; MPers. *dwxš* duxš, beside the (N)Ir. derived feminine (of ****puθra-*** ‘son’) ****puθrī-*** Yazgh. *pöc*, Šuγn. *-bic*. Specific NIr. words for ‘daughter’ are built as fem. derivatives of generic concepts of ‘descendant, child’ such as ****fraʣani̯ā-*** Šuγn. *rizīn*, Bartangī *razen*. The originally generic meaning of ‘descendant, species, kind’ in such derivatives prevails, however, in ****ʣātaka-*** Chwrsm. *zʾdy˘k*, *zʾdyc*; MPers. *zʾtk*, *zʾdg* zādag; NPers. *zāda*; Bal. *zātk*, *zāxt*, *zāk*; cf. also above, 5.2, on the word-family of ****ʣanaka-*** and ****ʣan(θ/h)aka-*** < ****ʣanthaka-***. The originally generic meaning of ****puθra-*** (‘young animal; child’) shows up in the cmpd. ‘childless’: ****apuθra-*** YAv. *apuθra*-; Pṣ̌t. *bur*, *b’ura*.

6.2.4. Further direct relatives in the vertical line of descent may have both the specific meaning ‘grandson’ and the generic ‘descendant’; thus, the root-noun ****napāt-***/****naft-***OAv. loc.pl. *nafšu-cā*; YAv. acc.sg. *napāt-əm*, n.sg. *napå*(*sə*-); MPers. *np* nab *~ npt* naft < PIIr. **nápāt-*/**napt-* (Ved. *nápāt*-) < PIE **nepot-* (no laryngeal, cf. Phryg. *nevotan*). The original meaning ‘grandson’ shows up in derivatives, particularly with the *-tar-*suffix found with other names for relatives: ****naftar-***/***nafθr-***, n.sg. ****naftā*** YAv. *naptārəm*/ *nafǝδr-* (Ved. TS. *náptār-am* / RV+ *náptr-*), with suffix *-(a-)ka-* built to the weak stem ****naft-***: ****naftaka-*** Bal. *naptag* or directly to the pseudo-root **nap°*, ****napaka-*** NPers. *nawa*; cf. also the dvandva-compound ****napā-puθra(ka)-*** MPers. **nabāpusag*?, NPers. *nawāsa*, Waxi *nəpüs* (Gershevitch 1963). OInd. and OIr. share an inherited (PIIr. < PIE) divinity ‘grandson of the waters’, RV+ *apā́ṃ nápāt* ~ YAv. *apąm napāt-*/*naptar-* (most recently Sadovski, To appear₃, with lit.). To this, the derived feminine is ****naftī-*** YAv. *napti* ‘granddaughter’, built not on the *-tar-* suffix but on the weak stem of ****napāt-***/ ****napt-***.

6.2.5. In the collateral line (horizontal and vertical), all main concepts are of inherited origin. Thus, ‘brother’: ****brātar-***/****brāθr-***, n.sg. ****brātā*** YAv. *brātar*-; Bactr. *β(α)ραδο*, *βραδαρο*, *βραδ(α)ρανο*; MPers. *blʾt-l*, *brʾd-r* brād, brādar; NPers. *birādar*; Yaghn. *virot*, *varot*; Pṣ̌t. *wror* with derivative ‘brother’s son’: ****brāθrii̯aka-*** Bactr. *βραυριγο*, *βραρηγο*, as well as ‘sister’: ****su̯asār-***/***su̯asr-***, n.sg. ****su̯asā*** YAv. *xᵛaŋha(r-)*; MPers. *xwh* xwah *~ hwʾhl*, *xwʾr* xwahar/xwār, with derivatives, especially in NIr., having the semantics ‘sister’s child’: ****su̯asrii̯ā˘-*** Munji *xur’ī*, Yazgh. *xʷer* and ****su̯asrii̯aka-*** Pṣ̌t. *xwəray’ay*; of inner-Iranian attestation is ****su̯arʣa-*** YAv. *xᵛarəzišta*-; MPers. *hwʾlyst’*, *xwʾryst* xʷālist/ xʷārist (≠ PIr. ****su̯arʣa-*** ‘food’, NPers. *xʷāl*).

6.2.6. Among the concepts for ‘relationship through marriage’, we have already seen different lexemes for ‘man’ and ‘woman’ in 4.2. The notion ‘becoming related by marriage’ can be reconstructed within Iranian as ****pagVšaka-*** (Martin Kümmel, p.c.): Sogd. *pɣšʾk*, *pɣšy*; Bactr. *παχþιιο*; Waxi *bakṣt* < **ham-p*°. Both PIE words like ****u̯ad[ʰ]ū-*** ‘bride’ Sogd. *wδwh*; BuddhSogd. *wδ*-; ManSogd. *wδw*; ChrSogd. *wdw*, *wd- wð’u*; Chwrsm. *wy˘δ*, *wuδ*, *wy˘δ*; Bactr. *ολο*, *οολο-*; Munji, Yidgha *w’ulo* and later formations like ****kāpai̯na-***‘bride money, bridewealth’ MPers. *kʾpyn* kābēn; Chwrsm. *kʾbyn*; NPers. *kābīn*, *kāwīn*(cf. Armen. *kapēnk‛*) belong here. The terms for almost all the positions in this tree of relatives, whether from the point of view of the wife or of the husband regarding the partner’s side of the family, are highly archaic. Starting from the position of one of the married partners, the lexeme for ‘mother-in-law’ is ****su̯aʦrū-*** Sogd. *‛ɣwšh*, NPers. *xusrū*, Talishi *häsы*, Munji *xúšo*, Yidgha *xušō˘* < PIIr. **su̯aćrúH-* (Ved. *śvaśrū´-*) < PIE **suek̑rúH-*, and the noun for ‘father-in-law’ is ****su̯aʦura-*** YAv. *xᵛasura*-; KurdKurm. *xazūr*; Pṣ̌t. *sxar*, *sxər*, *xwsar* < PIIr. **su̯áćura-* (Ved. *śváśura-*) < PIE **suék̑uro-*, with no vr̥ddhi, as opposed to Germ. *Schwager* < **su̯ēk̑uró-* ‘belonging to the **suék̑uro-*’.

6.2.7. From the position of the parents of the bride and of those of the groom, ‘son-in-law’ is designated in PIr. ****ʣāmātar-***/****ʣāmāθr-***, n.sg. ****ʣāmātā*** YAv. *zāmātar-*; Parth., Chwrsm. *zʾmʾd* zāmād; MPers. *dʾmʾt*, *dʾmʾd* dāmād; NPers. *dāmād*; Juh. *domor*, with derivative ****ʣāmātaka-*** Sogd. **zʾmtʾk*, *zʾmtʾyty* zāmtē < PIr. **dzā́ma(Htar)-* (Ved. *jā́mātar-*), cf. ****ʣāmau̯i̯a-*** ‘son-in-law’s brother’ YAv. *zāmaoiia-*; from the same base, without the family relationship suffix, ****ʣāma-*** means both ‘son-in-law’ and ‘relative’. ‘Daughter-in-law’ is ****snušā-*** Sogd. *šwnšh* šunš’a, NPers. *sunār*, Bal. *nišār*, Pṣ̌t. *nẓōr* < PIIr. **snušáH* (Ved. *snuṣā́-*) ***~* **snau̯š-*** Bactr. *ασνωηο*, *ασονωυο*; Digor *nostæ*.

6.2.8. From the perspective of the wife, the ‘husband’s brother / brother-in-law’ is designated by the PIr. term ****θai̯u̯ár-*** (with *θ°* ← **dʰ°* by a not quite regular sound development or analogy) Parāči *hīwar*; Yaghn. *s’ewĕr*, *sīwir*; Pṣ̌t. *lew’ar* < PIIr. **da(H)iu̯ár-*(Ved. *devár-*), as opposed to the fem. correspondent, later Ir. ****sama-katā-*** ‘woman in the same house = sister-in-law (husband’s brother’s wife)’ Šuγn., Bartangi *miǰād*. ****i̯ā-tar-***/***i̯āθr-*** NPers. *yārī*, Pṣ̌t. *yor* denotes, from the point of view of the husband, traditionally the ‘sister-in-law’ and, in case two brothers marry, the family relationship of the women to one another.

## 7. Abbreviations (languages, grammatical terms, general terms, and texts)

| abstr. | abstract (noun) |
| --- | --- |
| adj. | adjective |
| Alan. | Alanic |
| Arab. | Arabic |
| Aram. | Aramaic |
| Armen. | Armenian |
| AV | Atharvaveda |
| AVP | Atharvaveda-Paippalāda |
| AVŚ | Atharvaveda-Śaunaka |
| Bactr. | Bactrian |
| Bal. | Balochi |
| BuddhSogd. | Buddhist Sogdian |
| Bulg. | Bulgarian |
| Chant. | Chantian |
| ChrSogd. | Christian Sogdian |
| Chwrsm. | Chwaresmian |
| cmpd. | compound |
| coll. | collective |
| CtrIr. | Central Iranian |
| CtrNE | Central NE dialects (Kašani; Farizandi; Natanzi) |
| Ctr NW | Central NW dialects (Xunsari) |
| Ctr SE | Central SE dialects (Yazdi, Kermani) |
| CtrSW | Central SW dialects (Isfahani) |
| Cz. | Czech |
| du. | dual |
| EIr. | Eastern Iranian |
| ePIr. | Early Proto-Iranian |
| esp. | especially |
| Fārs Dial. | Fars dialects |
| f./fem. | feminine |
| Finnougr. | Finno-Ugric |
| gen. | genitive |
| Georg. | Georgian |
| Germ. | German |
| Gmc. | Germanic |
| Gr. | Greek |
| Hungar. | Hungarian |
| instr. | instrumental |
| IIr. | Indo-Iranian |
| Ir. | Iranian |
| Ishk. | Ishkashmi |
| Juh. | Juhuiri |
| Khotan. | Khotanese |
| KurdKurm. | Kurdish (Kurmanci) |
| KurdSor. | Kurdish (Sorani) |
| Lat. | Latin |
| loc. | locative |
| LW | loanword |
| m. | masculine |
| ManMPers. | Manichaean Middle Persian |
| ManParth. | Manichaean Parthian |
| Mans. | Mansian |
| ManSogd. | Manichaean Sogdian |
| Mazand. | Mazandarani |
| MPers. | Middle Persian |
| n. | nominative or noun |
| n. abstr. | abstract noun |
| n. act. | noun of action |
| neut. | neuter |
| n. instr. | noun of instrument |
| NIr. | Modern Iranian |
| NPers. | Modern Persian |
| OAv. | Old Avestan |
| OPers. | Old Persian |
| Oss. | Ossetic |
| OWIr. | Old Western Iranian |
| Pahl. | Pahlavi |
| Parth. | Parthian |
| pers. | person |
| Phryg. | Phrygian |
| PIIr. | Proto-Indo-Iranian |
| PIran. | Proto-Iranian |
| pl. | plural |
| PSlav. | Proto-Slavic |
| prep. | preposition(al) |
| Pšt. | Pashto |
| PN | personal name |
| r.-n. | root-noun |
| Russ. | Russian |
| RV | Rigveda |
| sg. | singular |
| Sogd. | Sogdian |
| STati | South Tati |
| subst. | substantive |
| Šuγn. | Shughni |
| SWIr. | Southwest Iranian |
| Tochar. | Tocharian |
| TS | Taittirīya-Saṁhitā |
| Tumshuq. | Tumshuqese |
| Turk. | Turkic |
| v. adj. | verbal adjective |
| Ved. | Vedic |
| VS | Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā |
| WMIr. | Western Middle Iranian |
| WNIr. | Western Modern Iranian |
| Yaghn. | Yaghnobi |
| YAv. | Young Avestan |
| Yazgh. | Yazghulami |
| Zaz. | Zazaki |
