---
title: "The Word for Wine in Anatolian, Greek, Armenian, Italic, Etruscan, Semitic and Its Indo-European Origin"
author: "Reiner Lipp"
date: 2020
source_type: born-digital
extraction_date: 2026-05-07
source_file: "lipp-2020-word-wine.pdf"
---

# The Word for *Wine* in Anatolian, Greek, Armenian, Italic, Etruscan, Semitic and Its Indo-European Origin

Reiner Lipp

<!-- source-page: 195 -->

## Abstract

It can be shown that Hittite u̯ii̯an(a)- ‘grapevine; wine’ continues a Proto-Indo-European nomen agentis *u̯éi̯h₁-on-/ *u̯ih₁-n-́ ‘twiner, creeping plant, grapevine’, and that this stem formation provides the derivational base for further Indo-European words for ‘wine’ such as Latin vīnum < *u̯ih₁-n-ó- and Greek οἶνος < *u̯ói̯n-o- < *u̯ói̯(h₁)-n-o-, with the corresponding affiliation adjective preserved in Armenian gini ‘wine’ < *gu̯īníi̯o < *u̯oi̯n-ih₂ó-. The morphological structure of the respective base word and its derivatives corresponds to regular Proto-Indo-European patterns of word formation and is therefore congruous with the assumption of an Indo-European origin of the lexemes in question. Accordingly, it is likely that the etymologically isolated Semitic *u̯ai̯nu ‘wine’ was borrowed from Mycenaean Greek and that Proto-Kartvelian *γu̯ini̯o ‘wine’ is a loanword from Proto-Armenian or its prestage.

## Keywords

wine – Indo-European – Hittite – Greek – Latin – Etruscan – Semitic – etymology – internal derivation – hypostasis

## Introduction

<!-- source-page: 196 -->

In the Neolithic period the wild grapevine was to be found in the northern Mediterranean, on the lower and middle Danube, on the north coast of the Black Sea (Pontus), in the area of the northern and southern Caucasus, on the south coast of the Caspian Sea, in the Zagros region and in Anatolia on its Black Sea and Mediterranean coasts. Since already in the Neolithic period the berries of the wild grapevine were used for fermentation to wine, the Proto-Indo-Europeans in their homeland north of the Black Sea and the Caucasus also probably knew how to produce wine from local wild vines. Therefore it is legitimate to search for an explanation of the origin of the various designations for ‘wine’, which resemble each other in the individual Indo-European languages, on the basis of the phonology, morphology as well as the lexical and derivational patterns of Proto-Indo-European and the early stages of the relevant individual languages. For this purpose, the evidence from the Old Indo-European languages is presented in the following and supplemented by material from the adjacent languages.

The first evidence for the production of wine (with admixture of resin for better preservation) is provided by a residuum of tartaric acid in a ceramic vessel found at a neolithic site from 5400–5000 bc in the northern Zagros area (Hajji Firuz Tepe, Iran).

See McGovern Glusker, Exner and Voigt 1996, McGovern 2003: 64–74

On the various forms of the word for ‘wine’ and ‘grapevine’ in the Indo-European area and neighbouring regions, the prehistoric distribution of the wild grapevine (also in the North Pontus area of the original Indo-European homeland) as well as the beginning of wine-growing and its spread after the domestication of the grapevine, we are informed concisely by EIEC: 644–646 and in detail by the monographs of McGovern, Fleming and Katz 1996, McGovern 2003 with further references. A fundamental study on the origins and spread of wine, which ties together data from as many sources as possible (linguistics, archaeology, literature), has recently been provided by the as yet unpublished Ph.D. thesis of Luke Gorton (Gorton 2014) and an article based on it (Gorton 2017). Further references to historico-cultural, philological, and linguistic treatments are to be found in Aspesi 2013, Brogyanyi and Lipp 2016 and the comprehensive etymological lemma on the Hittite word for ‘wine; grapevine’ in HEG IV: 556–564.

## 1. The Anatolian Evidence

### 1.1

<!-- source-page: 197 -->

Hittite u̯ii̯an(a)- c. ‘wine; grapevine’ (written mostly as the Sumerogram GEŠTIN ‘wine’ or GIŠGEŠTIN beside its simplified variant GEŠTIN ‘grapevine’ with or without phonetic complements) is to be regarded as the continuant of the Proto-Anatolian form *u̯íi̯on- < Pre-Proto-Anatolian *u̯íh₁-on- (*/h₁/ without vowel coloration, i.e. without oral constriction, therefore probably articulated as a glottal fricative [h] as in German Haus, English house). According to Kloekhorst (2008: 1012), the Hittite form represents an original n-stem u̯ii̯an- matching Hieroglyphic Luwian u̯ii̯an-i-, u̯in-i- c. ‘grapevine’ and the base of the corresponding adjective Cuneiform Luwian u̯in-ii̯a- (see below §1.2), which display apophony of the athematic stem (no vowel breaking, see below §7.3), and there is no clear evidence for a thematic a-stem in Anatolian. In fact, within the Hittite paradigm itself, practically all attested forms with phonetic complements or in phonetic spelling (except for the instr.sg. ú-i-i̯a-an-ta in fragmentary context, see below) are ambiguous as to their stem formation, as can be seen in the following sample (for the Hittite attestations in their context, see HEG IV: 557–558 with further references): acc.sg. ú-i-i̯a-na-an = /u̯ii̯anan/ ‘wine’ (KBo xii 126+ i 69 [MH/MS]) in purely phonetic spelling besides GEŠTIN-na-an ‘wine’ (KUB xxxvi 110 Rs. 7 [OS]; KBo xvii 11 + Rs. iv 23 [OS]; KUB lvi 50 ii 2 [NH]), GEŠTIN-an ‘wine’ (KUB xxix 1 iii 2 [OH/NS]; StBoT viii Rs. iii 14 [OH]; Otten and Souček 1969: 30–31), gen.sg. GEŠTIN-i̯a-na-aš = u̯i5-i̯a-na-aš ‘of the wine’ (in /u̯ii̯anas ispanduzii̯assar/ ‘vessel for the libation of the wine’ KUB lvi 50 ii 5 [NH]; GEŠTIN = u̯i5-), GEŠTIN-aš ‘of the wine’ (KBo xxiv 34+ Vs. 23 [MH]), abl.sg. GEŠTIN-i̯a-na-az = u̯i5-i̯a-na-az ‘with wine’ (KBo xiv 103 Rs. iv 11; GEŠTIN = u̯i5-), instr.sg. GEŠTIN-ni-it = /u̯ii̯anid/ ‘with wine’ (KUB X 95 Vs. iii 6 [NH]), GEŠTIN-it ‘with wine’ (vsnf12, 21 Vs. iii 8 [NH]); in fragmentary context: instr.sg. GEŠTIN-ta šu-un[-na-aḫ-ḫé ‘and with wine fill[ed i’ (KBo xvii 4 iii 16’ [OH]; cf. Otten and Souček 1969: 34–35, 129; -ta = /-t-a/ < */-d-ha/ with enclitic -a ‘and’ < *-ha = Pal., CLuw. -ḫa ‘and, also’ < *-h₂o ‘at that’); with clearly athematic stem formation, on the other hand, instr.sg. ú-i-i̯a-an-ta = /u̯ii̯an-d/ (IBoT iii 93 i 12), which for its fragmentary context is unclear in meaning however: ‘with wine’ or ‘with grapevine’? (on instr.sg. GEŠTIN-ta and ú-i-i̯a-an-ta cf. Oettinger 2003: 143–144 n. 4; for further attestations of forms from the paradigm of the Hittite word for ‘grapevine; wine’, see below §§1.1.3–4).

The Sumerogram GEŠTIN = /u̯ii̯an-/ was also used by acrophony as a syllabic sign with the value <u̯i->, which in the philological classification is represented as the syllabogram u̯i5-, e.g. pa-an-ga-u-u̯i5 = pa-an-ga-u-i dat.-loc. of panku- ‘assembly’ and na-a-u̯i5 = na-a-ú-i ‘not yet’.

Cf. silvestri 1974: 266 with n. 1, rüster and neu 1989: 153–154 Nr. 131, hoffner and melchert 2008: 21

<!-- source-page: 198 -->

For the shape of the instrumental ending, cf. athematic Hitt. genu- ntr. ‘knee’ (OHitt.+ nom.acc. gēnu, gen. gēnuu̯aš ← PIE *ǵón-u/*ǵén-u- → *ǵn-éu̯-) with instr. OHitt. genut, ganut; Hitt. keššar-/kišr-/kiššer- c. → ntr. ‘hand’ (< *ǵʰés-or-/obl. *ǵʰes-r-́ ← PIE loc. *ǵʰes-ér from root noun *ǵhós-/*ǵhés- ‘hand’ [Neri 2013: 195–196, 200]; nom. OHitt. keššar < *ǵʰés-ōr and remodelled kišširaš etc., Gr. χείρ f. < obl. *ǵʰes-r-) with instr. OHitt. kiššarat, MHitt. kiššarta = /gisar-d/, MHitt. kiššarit, kišrīt; and Hitt. išḫiman-/išḫimen- c. ‘cord, rope’ (< *sh₂i-món-/obl. *sh₂i-mén- ← PIE *sh₂éi̯-mon-/obl. *sh₂i-mén-; nom. OHitt. isḫimāš < *sh₂i-mṓ+s ← PIE *sh₂éi̯-mō(n) vs. later remodelled nom. išḫimanaš; see below §§1.1.3, 7.4) with instr. OHitt.+ išḫimanta = /isḫiman-d/, MHitt. išḫimanit as against thematic šākuu̯a coll.pl. ‘eyes’ with instr. šākuu̯at, šakuit and secondarily thematic antuḫša- ‘human being, man’ with instr. antuḫšet.

On the Hittite paradigm forms see hoffner and melchert 2008: 13, 77, 79–80, 101, 111–112, 115–116; on the genesis of the athematic instrumental ending /-d/, /-id/ see melchert and oettinger 2009

#### 1.1.1

H.C. Melchert (p.c.) assumes, however, that, corresponding to Luwian /u̯ii̯an-ī-/, /u̯ī̆n-ī-/ ‘grapevine’ from athematic *u̯ii̯an- with a further derivative /u̯in-ī-/ for the designation of ‘wine’ in Hier.Luw. (continuing the affiliation adjective u̯in-ii̯a- ‘pertaining to a grapevine’ as attested in Cun.Luw.; see below §1.2), in Hittite the athematic stem u̯ii̯an- was limited to the designation of the ‘grapevine’, which was rendered by the Sumerogram GIŠGEŠTIN or simplified GEŠTIN ‘grapevine’, and that for the designation of ‘wine’, rendered by the Sumerogram GEŠTIN ‘wine’, Hittite used a descriptively thematic hypostasis u̯ii̯an-a-*, which was based on the athematic stem and thus denoted *‘drink from the grapevine’; this hypostasis would then underlie the attested inflectional forms for ‘wine’, which are ambiguous as to their stem formation like the aforementioned forms, e.g. gen.sg. GEŠTIN-i̯a-na-aš = u̯i5-i̯a-na-aš ‘of wine’. According to Melchert’s analysis, a hypothetical nom.sg. Hitt. */u̯ii̯an-a-s/ ‘wine’ would be a hypostasis of the gen. /u̯ii̯an-as/ ‘(that) of the grapevine’, which belongs to the athematic paradigm of /u̯ii̯an-/ ‘grapevine’ (for this analysis, see Gorton 2014 with n. 91, 2017: 7–8). This explanation would account for the formation in question, because the mechanism of forming a hypostasis from the genitive was productive in Hittite, cf. u̯aštul ntr. ‘sin’ with gen. u̯aštulaš ‘(the one) of the sin’ = ‘the sinner’, tai̯azil ntr. ‘theft’ with gen. tai̯azilaš ‘(the one) of the theft’ = ‘the thief’ (cf. Friedrich 1974: 123, Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 256, Puhvel 2012).

#### 1.1.2

<!-- source-page: 199 -->

<!-- source-page: 200 -->

In fact, for finding out the underlying stem class of the word for ‘wine’ and ‘grapevine’ we have only the attestation of a clearly athematic instrumental form in fragmentary context, that is ú-i-i̯a-an-ta (see above §1.1). But as its meaning is unclear from the context, it therefore does not tell us if the athematic stem u̯ii̯an- also had the meaning ‘wine’ beside ‘grapevine’. For a descriptively thematic stem *u̯ii̯an-a- ‘wine’ as base of a derivational form, one could perhaps adduce the Anatolian toponym /u̯ii̯ana-u̯anta-/ (synchronically understandable as *u̯ii̯ana-u̯ant- ‘abundant in wine’), which in the Hittite transmission appears as URUu̯i5-i̯a-na-u̯a-an-da KBo iv 3 1 18 (in the contract between the Hittite king Muršiliš ii and Kupanta-dKAL, king of the Luvian states Mira and Kuu̯alii̯a), URUu̯i5-i̯a-na-u-u̯a-an-ta (Brandenstein 1943: 14, 53–54, Text 2 Vs. ii 1 [Text 2 = vat 6688 + Bo 2496]), URUu̯i5-i̯a-na-u̯a-an[-ta-aš] KUB xxvi 43 1 15 (in the royal decree by Tudḫalii̯aš iv and Puduḫepa, beside the variant given below). In the classical epoch, this toponym has a correspondence in the name of the Lycian city of Οἰνόανδα (ntr.pl.) = Oenianda in the upper Xanthos valley (Strabo xiii 631; Ptolemy, Geog. v 3,6; Pliny, Nat. Hist. v 101) and Oeniandos, later called Epiphania, in southeast Cilicia (Pliny, Nat. Hist. v 93). As in the Greek version there is an adaption to the thematic noun οἶνος ‘wine’, one cannot decide on this evidence if the Anatolian base word had a final stem vowel or not. But the use of the syllabogram <-na-> instead of <-nu-> before <-u̯a-> or <(-u)-u̯a-> shows that there is a real a-vowel after the preceding /n/ and that therefore the following /u̯/ is intervocalic, a fact which can be expressed orthographically by the use of an additional vowel syllabogram, thus <-na-u-u̯a-> besides <-na-u̯a-> to render a sequence /-nau̯a-/ (for this orthographic usage, cf. Kimball 1999: 105). On the other hand, there are indeed Hittite versions of this toponym without a final a-vowel of the derivational base, i.e. /u̯ii̯an-u̯anta-/ attested in u̯i5-i̯a-nu-an-ta-aš KBo ii 7 1 18, and /u̯in-u̯anta-/ = u̯i5-nu-u̯a-an-ta-aš KUB xxvi 50 1 4 (in the royal decree by Tudḫalii̯aš iv and Puduḫepa, beside the variant given above), ú-i-nu-an-da KBo xvii 103 1 16, 17. These forms continue the possessive formations *u̯ii̯an-u̯ant- and *u̯in-u̯ant- ‘abundant in grapevine/ vine-stocks’ based on athematic *u̯ii̯an-/*u̯īn- ‘grapevine, vine-stock’ as reflected by Luwian (Hieroglyphic Luwian u̯ii̯an-i-, u̯in-i- c. ‘grapevine, vine-stock’, Cuneiform Luwian u̯in-ii̯a- adj. ‘pertaining to a grapevine’; see below §1.2). The variant /u̯ii̯ana-u̯anta-/ might thus be a remodelling of these primary forms under the influence of an existing thematic noun *u̯ii̯an-a- ‘wine’, whereas Οἰνόανδα, the epichoric form of classical times, might be a Greek adaption of /u̯in-u̯anta-/ (derived from athematic *u̯īn- ‘grapevine’) with u̯ being rendered by Gr. <o> in the absence of /u̯/ in Greek. As for Oeniandos, this has been supposed to be based on Hitt.-Luw. u̯inii̯ant- as a toponym with a different formation meaning originally *‘wine, must, grape juice’ (cf. Neumann 1962: 208, 211; for the formation, see below §1.1.5), but it has to be considered that also Οἰνόανδα shows the variant Oenianda in Latin rendering with the vowel -i- perhaps as in compounds. (For the analysis of the variants, see Silvestri 1974: 272–273, 274; for the attestations id. 269–271 [Cuneiform], 272–273 [classical] on the basis of Laroche 1961: 61; for the Cuneiform attestations, cf. del Monte and Tischler 1978: 482–483, HEG IV: 560 with further refs.; for the attestation and localization of the respective Anatolian toponyms in classical times, cf. Zgusta 1984: 431–432 with further refs.; and for the identification of Hieroglyphic Luwian (REGIO)VITIS ‘vine-stock country’ with the toponym /u̯ii̯an(a)u̯anta-/, see Poetto 1993: 48–49, 80 with n. 193 and further refs., Hawkins 1995: 29, 54–55, 78.)

#### 1.1.3

On the other hand, one also has to consider the possibility of the occurrence of a secondary thematic stem in -a-, which is neither conditioned by derivation nor hypostasis, but rather due to late paradigmatic remodelling of an athematic stem. For Old Hittite, one can expect a primary athematic nom.sg. */u̯ii̯as/ or */u̯ii̯ās/ (< Pre-Proto-Anatolian *u̯íh₁-ō+s or *u̯ih₁-ṓ+s ← PIE nom.sg. *u̯éi̯h₁-ō(n) beside acc.sg. *u̯ei̯h₁-ón- with accent shift according to the *ku̯etu̯óres rule, and obl. *u̯ih₁-n-́; for the reconstruction of the stem formation and its apophony, see below §§6.1, 7.1, 7.4, 9.1). Within the inner history of Hittite, this form could have been replaced by a descriptively thematic nom.sg. */u̯ii̯an-a-s/ backformed in analogy to acc.sg. GEŠTIN-na-an = /u̯ii̯an-an/ etc.; cf. the n-stem išḫiman- c. ‘cord, rope’ with nom.sg. OHitt. išḫimāš (< *sh₂i-mṓ+s = OSax. sīmo, OE sīma ‘rope’ < Pre-Proto-Germanic *sih₂-mō̃ ← PIE *sh₂éi̯-mō(n)/obl. *sh₂i-

<!-- source-page: 201 -->

mén-) and its younger remodelling into nom.sg. Hitt. išḫimanaš in analogy to acc.sg. išḫimanan (< *sh₂i-món- ← PIE *sh₂ei̯-món- with accent shift by the “ku̯etu̯óres rule”, see below §7.4; for the paradigm, cf. Harðarson 1987: 122, Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 111). And there is indeed an Old Hittite form GEŠTIN-aš in the meaning ‘grapevine, vine-stock’, which can either be interpreted as nom.sg. */u̯ii̯as/ or */u̯ii̯ās/ (from athematic /u̯ii̯an-/) or */u̯ii̯an-a-s/ (backformation from the athematic acc.sg. /u̯ii̯an-an/ etc.) or as gen.sg. */u̯ii̯an-as/ (from athematic /u̯ii̯an-/): n=ašta anda ḫalkiaš dGÌR-aš G[EŠ]TIN-aš kitta ‘and in it (i.e. in the fleece) lies/is put the field god of the grain and (of) the vine-stock’ (KUB xvii 10 iv 30 [OH/MS]; cf. HEG IV: 557–558). Thus, even if a Hitt. nom.sg. of the form */u̯ii̯an-a-s/ in the meaning ‘wine’ were unambigously attested, we still could not tell if this formation is merely a secondary inner-Hittite remodelling within the paradigm of an athematic stem u̯ii̯an- ‘wine ← grapevine’ showing a metonymic semantic shift (cf. Akkad. karānu ‘grape, grapevine; wine’; see below §11), or if it continues a Pre-Hittite hypostasis *u̯ii̯an-a-s ‘wine’ = ‘drink from the grapevine’, which arose by reanalysis of the athematic gen.sg. /u̯ii̯an-as/ ‘(that) of the grapevine’ (see above §1.1.1). In this case, we are therefore confronted with a heuristic dilemma and can only say that in Hittite the existence of a distinct hypostasized a-stem *u̯ii̯an-a- meaning ‘wine’ beside an n-stem u̯ii̯an- meaning ‘grapevine’ is possible and inferable with some plausibility, but not provable [so also L. Gorton per litteras].

#### 1.1.4

Nom.sg. Hitt. GEŠTIN-iš = /u̯ii̯an-i-s/ ‘grapevine, vine-stock’ appears as expression of a generic singular in the following passage of a New Hittite version of an Old Hittite text (KBo vi 26 i 18–19; HEG IV: 558): takku GEŠTIN-iš GIŠḪAŠḪUR [GIŠḪAŠḪUR.KUR.RA našma GIŠŠ]ENNUR u̯arāni ‘if the grapevine/vine-stock, the apple tree, the apricot tree or medlar tree burns down’. Due to the fact that the Sumerograms in this passage do not show plural markers and the verb is in the singular (u̯arāni ‘burns down’), it is likely that in the series of plants mentioned each is enumerated in the generic singular; therefore it is less likely that GEŠTIN-iš is a form of the nom.pl. with the late New Hittite ending -iš (for this ending, cf. Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 71 with refs.). This i-stem formation meaning ‘grapevine, vine-stock’ is probably a late Hittite borrowing or remodelling on the basis of Luwian /u̯ii̯an-ī-s/ ‘grapevine, vinestock’, as attested by Hieroglyphic Luwian (‘VITIS’)wa/i-ia-ni-sa, with normal Luw. ī-mutation in the genus commune (see below §1.2).

A clearly hybrid Hitt. i-stem formation like Hitt. GEŠTIN-iš, which was triggered by the productive Luw. ī-mutation of Luwians speaking Hittite, can also be seen in another NHitt. version of an OHitt. text, that is nom. sg. antuu̯aḫḫiš ‘human being’ as a remodelling of a clearly archaic form antuu̯aḫḫaš stemming from the OHitt. original (< nom.sg. PIE *en-dhu̯éh₂-ōs from s-stem *en-dhu̯éh₂-os-/*en-dhuh₂-s- ‘having breath in oneself’). Already in the spoken language of the Middle Hittite epoch, this archaic form was replaced with antuḫšaš by generalization of antuḫša- based on the oblique stem as in OHitt. gen.sg. anduḫšaš (< *en-dhuh₂-s-ós).

See rieken 1999: 191–192 with n. 884, kimball 1999: 184, hoffner and melchert 2008: 79–80 with n. 1

#### 1.1.5

<!-- source-page: 202 -->

Luwian origin also has to be considered for the derivative Hitt. (d)u̯inii̯ant- ‘(the genius of the) grape juice, must’ < *u̯inii̯-ant- ‘consisting of grape juice’ with acc.sg. dú-i-ni-i̯a-an-ta-an (KUB lv 65 iv 16), ú-i-ni-i̯a-an-da-an (KUB xxv 37 iii 17. 19 [NH]; KUB xxv 37 iv 6 [NH]) = /u̯inii̯ant-an/ because of the formation of the base word corresponding to Hieroglyphic Luwian /u̯inī-/ < *u̯in-ii̯a- ‘wine, must, grape juice’ = ‘drink made from grapevine’, derived from u̯ii̯an(-i)-, u̯in(-i)-‘grapevine’ (cf. Starke 1990: 381 n. 1378, Oettinger 2003: 143 with refs., HEG IV: 563–564 with text attestations; see below §1.2).

### 1.2

Hieroglyphic Luwian u̯ii̯an-i-, u̯in-i- c. ‘grapevine, vine-stock’ < Proto-Anatolian *u̯íi̯on-/loc. *u̯ii̯én(-i) (é > Luw. a)/obl. *u̯ī̆n- < Pre-Proto-Anatolian *u̯íh₁-on-/ loc. *u̯ih₁-én(-i)/obl. *u̯ih₁-n-: e.g. nom.sg. (‘vitis’)wa/i-ia-ni-sa = /u̯ii̯an-ī-s/ (SULTANHAN §7), wa/i-ia-ni-sá (SULTANHAN §15), wa/i-ia-ni-sa (SULTAN-HAN §23); acc.sg. (VITIS)wa/i-ni-na = /u̯ī̆n-ī-n/ (KÖRKÜN §11), ?dat.-loc.sg. wa/i-ia-ni-[x]-i = /u̯ii̯an-i/? (KULULU 1 §8). In the nominative and accusative, this original n-stem shows the Luwian enhancement of the stem by /-ī-/, which is regular in the genus commune and is called ī-mutation. Due to the effect of the widespread, but not pervasive Luwian contraction ii̯a > i (= /-ī-/ presumably), which becomes more frequent in the 1st millenium bc (cf. Yakubovich 2015: 10 §5.2.1), some instances of Luw. u̯in- as in the acc. /u̯ī̆n-ī-n/ might go back to the original strong stem u̯ii̯an- as inferable for the acc. */u̯ii̯an-ī-n/ besides the attested nom. /u̯ii̯an-ī-s/, but in other cases Luw. u̯in- can continue the weak stem variant *u̯ī̆n- < Pre-Proto-Anatolian *u̯ih₁-n-. A derivative of this n-stem is attested in the form of the instr.sg. Hier.Luw. wa/i-ní-ti ‘with (measures of) wine’ (KARKAMIŠ A30h §3; for the semantic interpretation see Hawkins 2000: 178, 468) = /u̯inīdi/ < *u̯inii̯adi with the Luwian contraction ii̯a > i. Thus in the case of this Hieroglyphic Luwian form, we are dealing with a stem /u̯inī-/ < *u̯in-ii̯a- (< *u̯īn-ii̯ó-; for the respective contraction also in Luw. -ii̯a-stems, cf. Yakubovich 2015: 13 §6.2) meaning ‘wine, must, grape juice’ = ‘drink made from grapevine’ as a designation of affiliation derived from u̯ii̯an(-i)-, u̯in(-i)- ‘grapevine’ (for this morphological and functional analysis based on a suggestion by C. Melchert, see Gorton 2014 with nn. 89, 90; 2017: 6f.; see above §1.1.1), like Cuneiform Luwian u̯in-ii̯a- adj. ‘pertaining to a grapevine’: coll.pl. ú-i-ni-i̯a = /u̯inii̯a/ (KBo xiii 263,2; quantity of -ī̆- in /u̯ī̆n-/ depending on the position of the Anatolian accent). (For the attestations, cf. Starke 1990: 381 n. 1378, Melchert 1993: 269, Kloekhorst 2008: 1012, ACLT s.v. Hieroglyphic wiyani(ya)-, HEG IV: 558–559.)

#### 1.2.1

<!-- source-page: 203 -->

The usual designation for ‘wine’ in Luwian has a different etymological origin: CLuw. ma-ad-du = /máddu/, HLuw. (VITIS)ma-tú-sà, ma-tu-sà = /máddu-sa/ ntr. ‘wine’ (Luwian gemination by fortition of a lenis after inherited *é in open syllable by Lex Čop) < Proto-Anatolian *médu ‘sweet grape-juice’ < PIE *médh-u- ‘honey, mead’ = Ved. mádhu- ‘sweet drink, honey’, Gr. μέθυ ‘intoxicating drink, wine’, OHG metu ‘mead’, OCS medъ ‘honey’ etc. (cf. Starke 1990: 191 n.

624, HEG II: 165–166, Melchert 1993: 144–145, ACLT s.v. Hieroglyphic mattu-, s.v. Cuneiform mattu-).

## 2. The Greek Evidence

Greek οἶνος m. ‘wine’ (Hom.Il.+), gen.sg. Cret. ϝοινο (Gortyn), Cypr. wo-i-no = /u̯oi̯nō/, and already Mycenaean wo-no = /u̯oi̯nos/, Myc. ox name wo-no-qo-so = /u̯oinoku̯-orsos/ *‘having wine-coloured buttocks’ (for the Mycenaean evidence, see DMic. ii 442–445; cf. Hom. οἶνοπ- ‘wine-coloured, dark red’ < *u̯oi̯n-oku̯- ‘wine-coloured, having the appearance of wine’) < Proto-Gr. *u̯ói̯no- < PIE *u̯ói̯(h₁)-no- ‘wine’ (on the formation, see below §§10.2.1–2), from which the collective Gk. οἴνη f. ‘grapevine, vine-stock’ (Hesiod+) < *u̯oi̯nā (in the functional meaning *‘wine plant’) is derived (cf. ἐλαίᾱ, Ιon. -η ‘olive-tree, olive’: ἔλαιον ‘olive oil’). Beside these forms, there were semantically corresponding continuants of *médh-u- ‘honey, mead’ in Myc. me-tu-wo ne-wo gen. ‘in the season of the new wine’, Gr. Hom.Il.+ μέθυ ‘intoxicating drink, wine’, which in everyday language soon fell out of use and survived only as an archaic word in later poetry (for the Myc. evidence, see DMic. I 446; for the lexeme, see above §1.2.1 and below §5.6.2).

Context-sensitive laryngeal loss by Saussure’s Law: oRH.C > oR.C. Cf. *tórh₁-mo- ‘hole’ > *tór-mo- > Gr. τόρμος ‘hole’ against *térh₁-tro- > Gr. τέρετρον ‘driller’; *sólh₂-u̯o- ‘whole, entire, undamaged’ > *sól-u̯o- > Gr. ὅλος, Ved. sárva- against *sl̥h₂-eu̯-ó- > Proto-Italic *salau̯o- > Lat. salvus, Osc. σαλαϝσ, *sl̥h₂-i- ‘prosperity’ > CLuw. šalḫi-tti- (for further specification of Saussure’s law, see below §3).

<!-- source-page: 204 -->

As etymologically related formations, note also the n-stem Gr. υἱήν, ἢ υἱόν· τὴν ἄμπελον (Hesychius) = *ϝιήν ‘grapevine, vine-stock’ < Proto-Gr. *u̯ii̯ḗn < PIE *u̯ih₁-ḗn (on the formation, see below §8), and the u-stem Myc. we-je-we = /u̯ei̯-eu̯-es/ nom. pl. f. ‘(vine) shoots, sprouts’ (DMic. ii 418) from *u̯éi̯h₁-u-/*u̯ih₁-éu̯- > *u̯éi̯u-/ *u̯ii̯éu̯- (for the analysis as feminine u-stem with apophonically conditioned suffix allomorph *-éu̯- and not as masculine eu̯-stem, cf. Perpillou 2012: 111) beside *u̯éi̯-tu-/*u̯i-téu̯- ‘(willow) rod’ (with secondary root apophony) > Hom.+ ἴτυς [ῐ] ‘rim of a wheel/shield’ (Aeolic *ϝίτυς, acc. to Terentianus Maurus 658: vitym gens Aeoli; cf. Lat. vītis ‘tendril, grapevine’), and derived Hom.+ ἰτέη [ῐ], Att. ἰτέα [ῑ] ‘willow; wicker shield’ (γιτέα [= *ϝιτέα]· ἰτέα Hesychius), Εἰτέα Attic deme name (for the reshaped apophony, cf. Neri 2017: 324–325; see below §6.1).

## 3. The Armenian Evidence

Armenian gini ‘wine’ (gen. ginwoy = [ginu̯o] with -u̯o < *-i̯ói̯o < *-ii̯óhi̯o undergoing pretonic syncope of unaccented *i due to the prehistoric penultima accent) < (Pre-)Proto-Armenian *gu̯īníi̯o < *u̯ēnii̯on < *u̯oi̯n-ii̯onm ntr. < *u̯oi̯n-ih₂ó- as adjective of affiliation on the basis of the PIE noun *u̯ói̯(h₁)-n-o- > *u̯ói̯n-o-, which is continued by Gr. (ϝ)οἶνος ‘wine’ (on the development and paradigm of Arm. gini, cf. Schmitt 1981: 43, 52, 68, 69, 71, 95, Matzinger 2005: 20, 66–67 with n. 304, and Olsen 1999: 439–440, who explains the Arm. vacillation between wo- and ea-stem on the basis of an old neuter). For derivational reasons, the Arm. form is less likely developed from (*u̯ēnii̯o- <) *u̯ei̯n-ii̯o- ← PIE *u̯ei̯(h₁)-no-. (For further references, cf. Martirosyan 2010: 214–215; on alternative derivations, see below §10.2.2.)

Context-sensitive laryngeal loss by Saussure’s Law: oRH.C > oR.C or.HRo > Ro with tautosyllabic reduction according to Neri (2003: 32 n. 69). Cf. *h₂u̯ors-ó-/-éh₂- ‘drop; dribble, rain’ > PIE *u̯ors-ó- resp. *u̯ors-éh₂- > Hitt. u̯arša- ‘fog, rain’, Luw. u̯arša- ‘drop’, causative *h₂u̯ors-éi̯e/o- ‘to drop, let rain’ > PIE *u̯ors-éi̯e/o- > Gr. οὐρέω ‘urinate’ vs. PIE *h₂u̯érs-h₂/-éh₂- ‘drop’ > Gr. *au̯ers-a-/-ā- > Ion.Att. ἕρση, Hom. also ἐέρση, Sappho ἐέρσᾱ, Pi. ἔερσᾰ, Papyrus ἀέρση, Cret. ἄερσᾰ (Hsch.) ‘dew(drop)’. For laryngeal loss also in a sequence with post-resonantic thematic vowel -o- per Neri (2003: 285 n. 949; 302 n. 1025), cf. *peth₁- ‘to fall’ in Gr.Hom. πεπτεώς ‘ducked, crouching’ < perf.ptc. *pé-pth₁-u̯os- vs. the verbal noun *póth₁-mo- ‘fall(ing)’ = *pót. h₁mo- > PIE *pót.mo- > Gr. πότμος ‘lot, destiny’.

Cf. lipp 2009b: 417 n. 141; 454, 456, 446 n. 222 and 340–341 n. 66 with further refs. to Saussure’s Law

The sound shape of (Pre-)Proto-Armenian *gu̯īníi̯o (gen. *gu̯īni̯ói̯o) is to be presupposed for the borrowing into Proto-Kartvelian (= South Caucasian) with *γu̯ini̯o ‘wine’ > Georgian γvino, Old Georgian nom. γwnoy, γwinoy = /γu̯ino-i̯/, Mingrelian gvini (with different adaptions of final *-i̯o [Sergio Neri, p.c.]). (For alternative interpretations and specifications, cf. Gippert 1994: 117–121; on the origin of vine cultivation in the sub-Caucasian area of Georgia and the Urartean-Armenian highland, cf. Greppin 2008.)

## 4. The Albanian Evidence

<!-- source-page: 205 -->

Albanian Tosk. vérë, Geg. vênë ‘wine’ < *ven- < Proto-Albanian *u̯oi̯nā ← PIE *u̯ói̯(h₁)-n-o- (see Demiraj 1997: 414).

## 5. The Italic Evidence

### 5.1

Latin vīnum ntr. ‘wine’ (since Livius Andronicus, Ennius, Plautus, Cato), Faliscan acc.sg. UI[NO]M [?] = /vīnom/ (ca. 600 bc; but interpretation doubtful, see below §5.2), UINO = /vīnom/ (4th c. bc), Umbrian acc.sg. VINU = /vīnom/, abl. sg. VINU = /vīnu/ (TI 3rd c. bc), uinu (TI 2nd c. bc) ‘wine’, Volscian abl.sg. uinu (ca. 300 bc) ‘wine’.

#### 5.1.1

Attestations from the neighbouring non-Italic languages of Ancient Italy: Etruscan VINUN (Tarquinia, end of 6th c. bc), VINỤ[M:] (Populonia, second half of 5th c. bc), VINUM (Liber Linteus and Ager Saenensis, 2nd c. bc) ‘wine’ (ET I p. 107; ii pp. 1–8, 67, 136, 167; Agostiniani 1998: 1–2; for the question whether Italic *u̯īnom was borrowed into Etruscan or vice versa, see below §§5.6, 5.6.1–2); (Celtic) Lepontic VINOM (Ornavasso, 2nd c. bc; interpretation uncertain: ‘wine’ according to Lejeune 1987: 502–509, followed by Solinas 1995: 375, Uhlich 2007: 407, or ‘white, shining’ < *u̯indo- = Gaulish vindo- according to Tibiletti Bruno 1981: 163–164, cf. Agostiniani 1998: 2 n. 10; if Lep. VINOM means ‘wine’, then it might be borrowed from Etruscan or an Italic language).

### 5.2

First attestations in Italic: Faliscan LF 1 = LDIA: 525–526 (ca. 600 bc): UI[NO]M:P[ORE]KADEUIOS ‘vinum porrigat Euius (= Bacchus)’ (‘Evius shall procure the wine’), LF 5 = LDIA: 529–530 (4th c. bc) i: FOIED.UINO.PIPAFO. CRA.CAREFO ii: FOIED.UINO.PAFO.CRA.CAREFO ‘hodie vinum bibam, cras carebo’ (‘today I will drink wine, tomorrow I will be without’). According to the new edition of the Faliscan inscriptions by Bakkum, the traditional restitution of the reading UI[NO]M in LF 1 = EF 1 is doubtful (Bakkum 2009: 199, 393–406); assured is thus only UINO in LF 5 = MF 59, 60 (Bakkum 2009: 199, 434–435). First attestations in Etruscan (ET ii pp. 67, 136): Ta 0.6 (vas, end of 6th c. BC) VINUN ‘vinum’; Po 4.3 (cippus, second half of 5th c. BC) FASLE:VINỤ[M:] M[…]AŚ ‘vas / libatio vinum…’.

### 5.3

<!-- source-page: 206 -->

Probable cognates of Lat. vīnum, Umbr. VINU etc. are to be found in the personal names Pre-Samnite Ps 3 nom. VINUXS = /u̯īnọ̄χs/, patronymic dat. VINI-CIIU = [u̯īnikii̯ọ̄] (Campania, 500–450 bc; the Pre-Samnite inscriptions from Campania, Lucania and Bruttium convey a dialect form close to that of South Picene and date back to the period before the invasion of the area by the Samnites beginning in 440 bc; see ST pp. 5–6), Oscan Po 3 gentile name nom. VIÍNIKIÍS = [u̯īniki̯ẹs] with dissimilation from *-i̯is < *-ii̯īs < *-ii̯-ii̯o-s as derivative of the patronymic (cf. Meiser 1986: 62–66), adapted as Lat. Vīnucius, Vīnicius, Etr. gen. Vinucenas (for the Sabellic attestations cf. ST pp. 71, 104; for the corresponding forms in Latin and Etruscan cf. Schulze 1966: 110 n. 3; 380) and also perhaps as Faliscan uịnụ[cio] (Bakkum 2009: 276, 556). These forms can be analysed as continuants or derivatives in *-ii̯ó- (< *-ih₂ó-) of the compound *u̯īn-oku̯-, nom.sg. *u̯īn-ōku̯-s ‘wine-coloured, having the appearance of wine’ (cf. Goth. wein-nas m. a-stem ‘having a nose (red) of wine’; Casaretto 2004: 58), thus *u̯īnok-ii̯o- > Pre-Samnite VINICIIU with delabialisation by analogy to VINUXS = /u̯īnọ̄χs/ < *u̯īnōks. For the apophony of the second compound member, cf. etymologically related Gr. oἰνώψ Soph., οἶνοπ- Hom. ‘winecolored, dark red’ < *u̯oi̯n-ōku̯-s, *u̯oi̯n-oku̯-, also used as personal name in Hom.Od. 21,144 Οἶνοπος υἱός ‘son of Oinops’ (see above §2; formation like Lat. atrōx, -ōcis ‘terrible in appearance, dreadful’, but without generalisation of the lengthened grade in Pre-Samnite, pace Meiser 1986: 172 n. 3). The stem displays the usual analogical lengthened grade in the nom.sg. of pie monosyllabic root nouns and shows the effect of the preconsonantal Italic delabialisation of *ku̯ as in the development of nom.sg. PIE *u̯ōku̯-s ‘voice’ (Ved. vā́k, Av. vāxš vs. Gr.

<!-- source-page: 207 -->

acc. ὄπ-α) > Italic *u̯ōks > Lat. vōx, which led to an analogical delabialization in the derived denominative *u̯oku̯-ā-i̯e/o- ‘to call’ > Italic *u̯oku̯āe/o- → *u̯okāe/o- > Lat. vocō, -āre, Umbr. subocau ‘invoco’ (for the delabialisation in Sabellic, cf. Buck 1928: 95). In contrast to the Etruscan gentile name Vinacna (Tarquinii, 6th c. bc), which is derived from the Sabellic stem in the shape *u̯īnok-, the Pre-Samnite form VINICIIU < *u̯īnok-ii̯o- with medial -i- beside VINUXS < *u̯īnōk-s either shows the effect of a vowel weakening in medial syllables or might have developed a context-sensitive anaptyctic vowel -i- after the beginning of Sabellic vowel syncope in open medial syllables like the later Oscan form VIÍNIKIÍS, but the variants with medial -u- such as Lat. Vīnucius, Falisc. uịnụ[cio], Etr. Vinucenas rather speak in favour of the first solution, i.e. for vowel weakening (for cases of vowel weakening in Sabellic instead of syncope, cf. Buck 1928: 55–57, Meiser 1986: 203, 267–272, Lipp 2009b: 131–132; for vowel anaptyxis in Oscan, cf. Buck 1928: 50–53). On the other hand, there has been the attempt by Kölligan (2013: 120–121) to derive the aforementioned Sabellic names from a compound form *u̯ī-noku̯-o-‘who harms/kills by force’, connecting it with Lat. vīs f., abl. vī ‘force’ and Lat. noxa ‘crime, damage’, nex ‘death’ on the base of an alleged root *neku̯- ‘to disappear; perish’. But in view of the etymologically corresponding forms Lat. noceō, -ēre ‘to harm’ = Ved. nāśáyati ‘makes disappear, destroys’ etc., one has to posit the PIE root as *neḱ- ‘to disappear, get lost’ (e.g. Ved. subj.aor. naśanti ‘will get lost’; LIV2: 451–452), which would entail an Italic compound form *u̯ī-nok-o- ‘having/provoking disappearance/harm by force’, without there being however other verbal governing compounds in *-nok-o- (as against the attested formations Lat. nocuus ‘harmful’, innocuus ‘harmless, innocent’, noxius ‘harmful’) or fixed parallel phrasal collocations with Lat. vī ‘by force’.

### 5.4

The forms of the word for ‘wine’ in the individual Italic languages can only go back to Proto-Italic *u̯īnom, which would plausibly continue a morphologically regular IE ablaut form *u̯ih₁-n-o- (with zero grade of the root as Hitt. u̯ii̯an- ‘wine; grapevine’, HLuv. u̯ii̯ani-, u̯ini- ‘grapevine’ < *u̯ih₁-on-/*u̯ih₁-n-against o-grade in Gr. (ϝ)οἶνος < *u̯ói̯(h₁)-n-o-). On the other hand, the following derivation is to be rejected and only presented argumenti causa: it starts from a presumed Italic *u̯oi̯nom as continuant of PIE *u̯ói̯(h₁)-n-o- or borrowing of Gr. u̯oi̯non*, acc.sg. of (ϝ)οἶνος m. (such a borrowing has been assumed by Szemerényi 1989: 166, Sihler 1995: 53): Italic *u̯oi̯nom > early Lat. *u̯einom (4th–3rd c. bc) > *u̯ẹ̄nom (3rd c. bc) > vīnum (ca. 200 bc; *u̯oi̯- > *u̯ei̯- > *u̯ẹ̄- as in PIE *u̯ói̯ḱ-o- ‘settlement’ [= Gr. (ϝ)οἶκος ‘house’] > Italic *u̯oi̯ko- > early Lat. *u̯ei̯ko- > OLat. /u̯ẹ̄ko-/ in inscr. vecos, veicus > Lat. vīcus ‘village’). Contrary to the actual evidence of the very early attested forms Falisc. /vīnom/ (4th c. bc), Umbr. /vīnom/ (3rd c. bc+), which cannot be borrowed from Latin, one would then expect as correspondences in Faliscan *u̯oi̯nom > *u̯ōnom (cf. Falisc. LOIFIRTA > LOFERTA = Lat. līberta), in Oscan *u̯oi̯nom, and in Umbrian *u̯ōnom (cf. *moi̯ni- [= Goth. ga-mains ‘common’] > Lat. com-mūnis, Osc. nom.sg.f. MÚÍNÍKÚ /moi̯nẹko/ ‘common’, Umbr. MUNEK-LU /mōnẹklom/ ‘collection, offering’ < *moi̯ni-tlo-, nomen instrumenti from the denominal verb *moi̯ni-i̯e/o- ‘to make common’).

### 5.5

<!-- source-page: 208 -->

The Faliscan and Umbrian forms are therefore incompatible with a phonological derivation from older *u̯oi̯nom (with Falisc. *u̯oi̯nom, Falisc. Umbr. *u̯ōnom as expected phonetic outcomes instead of actually attested Falisc. /vīnom/, Umbr. /vīnom/). In case of a development from Italic *u̯oi̯nom, the Latin sound shape vīnum would have developed too late (ca. 200 bc) and thus cannot be the source for an early borrowing into Faliscan (UI[NO]M [?], ca. 600 bc, UINO 4th c. bc), Etruscan (VINUN, end of 6th c. bc) and Umbrian (VINU, 3rd c. bc with text tradition from 5th–4th c. bc). The Latin form vīnum phonetically matching Faliscan /vīnom/, Umbrian /vīnom/ hence cannot continue an inherited form *u̯oi̯nom or a loan form *u̯oi̯nom from Greek acc.sg. /u̯oi̯non/*, which thus also cannot be the source of the other Italic forms. Therefore, the individual Italic forms presuppose *u̯īnom as common base form (see Blümel 1972: 26, Beekes 1987: 22–23, Flobert 1994: 290–291, who exclude a representation of former *oi̯ or *ei̯ in the respective Italic forms; likewise Gorton 2017: 12–13).

### 5.6

On the other hand, Agostiniani (1998: 5–6; similarly Gérard 2009: 19–20, 21) considers Etruscan VINUN, VINUM as a loan from Greek, being based on the acc. Gr. u̯oi̯non* and displaying an Etruscan sound substitution /u̯i-/ < */u̯ui̯-/ ← Gr. /u̯oi̯-/ similar to the process in the Etruscan name VILATAS ← Gr. Οἰλιάδᾱς with resyllabification of initial /u̯i-/ = <vi-> < */ui̯-/ ← Gr. /oi̯-/. However, in view of the incomplete match in the phonetic pattern of the compared forms, de Simone (2011: 476 with n. 17) is sceptical about Agostiniani’s loanword hypothesis, which he also rejects for palaeobotanical and chronological reasons.

The Etruscan initial realization /u̯i-/ = <vi-> < */ui̯-/ ← Gr. /oi̯-/ is orthographically and phonologically distinct from the medial representation /ui̯/ = <ui> ← Gr. /oi̯/ as in Etr. TRUIA ← Gr. Τροία, Etr. ΦUINIS ← Gr. Φοῖνιξ; the diphthong /ui̯/ also appears in genuine Etruscan words like PAPUI, loc. in -i of the month name. In contrast to Etruscan VINUM with normal Etruscan substitution of the final nasal by -m as in PRUXUM ← Gr. acc. πρόχουν from πρόχους ‘jug’, Etruscan VINUN shows a rare final -n as in the vessel designation QUTUN (already attested in the 7th c. bc) beside the synchronically more frequent variant QUTUM ← Gr. κώθων.

Cf. agostiniani 1998: 1–2

<!-- source-page: 209 -->

According to Agostiniani (1998: 6–7, 12–13 with n. 76), the Etruscan form VINUM spread together with the development of viniculture all over Italy from the end of the 8th century bc. In Agostiniani’s view, the Etruscan lexeme VINUM = /u̯inum/ was adapted within the individual Italic languages in the shape */u̯īnom/, the long vowel /ī/ being due to analogy of the semantically related Italic *u̯ītis > Lat. vītis ‘grapevine’. But within such a scenario, one could also suppose that with regard to duration in accented position or to the degree of opening, the vowel phoneme /i/ of Etruscan (which lacked a phonological opposition of vowel quantity) had a closer phonetic resemblance to the Italic long vowel /ī/ than to the Italic short vowel /i/, which in contrast had a rather open articulation; cf. Lat. Catamītus ← Etruscan Catmite ← Gr. Γανυμήδης. Thus in Agostiniani’s view, Latin vīnum, Faliscan /vīnom/, Umbrian /vīnom/ < *u̯īnom do not continue an inherited Italic form, but are loans from Etruscan VINUM, which for its part must be borrowed from Greek.

#### 5.6.1

Against this scenario, one might object that *u̯īno- is already attested from 500 bc (i.e. within the oldest text layer) as a compound member in ancient Italic names like Pre-Samnite VINUXS (< *u̯īn-ōk(u̯)-s ‘wine-coloured, having the appearance of wine’) and its derivative Pre-Samnite VINICIIU, Osc. VIÍNIKIÍS (< *u̯īn-ok(u̯)-ii̯o-) → Lat. Vīnicius etc. (see above §5.3). This means that in the Italic area the use of *u̯īno- as an appellative for ‘wine’ must be older by several centuries. In favour of the borrowing of the word for ‘wine’ from Italic into Etruscan, and not vice versa, one can also point to FUFLUNS, the Etruscan name of the wine god Bacchus, which was probably borrowed from Italic, as, contrary to unaccented word-internal vowels, in this form the vowel of the second syllable is never syncopated, therefore probably reflecting a long vowel of Sabellic origin (because of the phonetic length of accented vowels in native Etruscan words, the last word-internal long vowel of a form borrowed from a foreign language was evidently interpreted by Etruscan speakers as being accented and therefore did not undergo syncope, cf. Rix 2008: 147). The following derivations have been proposed: Etruscan FUFLUNS ← (dissimilation) *fluflū́ns ←

Italic *flōβlōno- < *bʰlōdʰlōno- < transposite *bʰleh₃-dʰlo-h₃no- ‘master of the garden’ from *bʰléh₃-dʰlo- ‘place of blossom, garden’ related to Lat. flōs m. ‘blossom’ < *bʰléh₃-os- (analysis by Meiser 1986: 9, 215–216); or rather, also based on *bʰleh₃- ‘to blossom’, the following better founded alternative (based on Rix 1998 with modification): noun *bʰe-bʰl(h₃)-o- ‘what is blooming, sprouting’ = ‘vegetation; ivy’ (reduplicated form of the type *ku̯e-ku̯l(h₁)-o- ‘what is turning’ = ‘wheel’) → transposite *bʰe-bʰl(h₃)-o-h₃no- ‘master of the vegetation / of ivy’ > Italic *feβlōno- > Sabellic *foβlọ̄n(o)s (labial coloration e > o) > Palaeo-Umbrian *foβlọ̄ns (with long vowel ọ̄) → Etruscan FUFLUNS = [fuflū́ns]. For the Com-

mon Italic coloration e > o between two tautosyllabic labials as in Sabellic *pompe ‘five’ < *ku̯énku̯e, cf. the comparable reduplicated form Lat. populus ‘people’ ← ‘army’, Umbr. poplo ‘army’ < *peplo- < *pe-pl(h₁)-o- ‘group of lance throwers’ = ‘group brandishing lances’ from *pelh₁- ‘to swing, brandish’ (etymology per Rix 1995: 82; cf. Gr. πόλεμος ‘war, fight’ < *pól(h₁)-mo- ‘the brandishing of lances’). For the borrowing process of a morphonologically corresponding formation into Etruscan, cf. the theonym Etruscan NEΘUNS ← Palaeo-Umbrian *nehtūns < *neftūns (with long vowel ū) = Lat. Neptūnus < Italic *neptūno- < transposite *nebʰ-tu-h₃no- ‘master of the wet element / of the moisture’.

#### 5.6.2

<!-- source-page: 210 -->

In contrast to vīnum, attested in Latin since Livius Andronicus, the archaic expression tēmētum (Old Latin and poetic) was a general term for an intoxicating drink, which was also used to refer to strong unmixed wine (also called merum ‘pure, unmixed wine’). Such a usage as a term for ‘wine’ is referred to by Paulus ex Festo 501, 6 (L): temetum vinum, unde temulentia et temulentus. It does not represent the old generic term for ‘wine’, however, as is also suggested by the related adjectives tēmulentus ‘drunk’, abstēmius ‘sober, abstemious’ ← *abs tēmō ‘without intoxication’ from *tēm-o- ‘intoxication, intoxicating substance’, which continues a vr̥ddhi derivative *tēmH-ó- ‘characterized by fainting, leading to faint’ from *temH- ‘to faint, become dark’ (related to Vedic tā́myati

‘faints’ < *tḿ̥H-i̯e/o-; see de Vaan 2008: 609 and cf. LEW ii 657, DELL 679–680, IEW 1063, LIV2: 624). That tēmētum could still be associated with abstēmius in classical times is obvious not only from Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria I 7–9 (‘abstemius’, quia ex abstinentia temeti composita vox est), but also from the testimony of Gellius, Noctes Atticae X 23, 1, according to which tēmētum is the designation for ‘wine’ in the ancient language:

Qui de victu atque cultu populi Romani scripserunt, mulieres Romae atque in Latio aetatem abstemias egisse, hoc est vino semper, quod ‘temetum’ prisca lingua appellabatur, abstinuisse dicunt.

Those who have written about the diet and the way of life of the Roman people, say that the women in Rome and Latium lived an abstemious life, that is, they abstained permanently from wine, which in the ancient language was called ‘temetum.

<!-- source-page: 211 -->

Contrary to Agostiniani’s reasoning (1998: 9), however, this need not imply that tēmētum is the original designation for ‘wine’ in Latin and vīnum a term only secondarily introduced from outside, because in the passage given the word tēmētum was rather adduced for its antiquity and its apparent relationship to abstēmius, but not because it was a designation used exclusively in former times instead of the later current expression vīnum; and it has to be stresssed that Lat. vīnum is already attested as early as Livius Andronicus, Ennius, Plautus, and Cato, i.e. in the earliest layer of literary texts, and appears as a base in old derivatives like vīnea f. ‘vineyard, rows of vine’, attested since the xii Tabulae, Plautus, and Cato. Besides, the transmission of lexical antiquities certainly does not go back to a time horizon beyond the 6th c. bc; in other words, it cannot reflect an epoch in which the lexeme vīnum was not yet in existence in the Italic languages. This reasoning is even consistent with Agostiniani’s own analysis, according to which this lexeme spread from Etruscan as a loanword within Italic, including Latino-Faliscan, from the end of the 8th c. bc (see above §5.6). The situation might in some respect be comparable to Greek, where both οἶνος ‘wine’ and μέθυ ‘intoxicating drink, wine’ were inherited and already attested in Mycenaean and in both the Iliad and the Odyssey, but where μέθυ had fallen out of use by the classical epoch (see above §2).

### 5.7

Not acceptable is the derivation by Gamkrelidze and Ivanov (1995: 557) of Lat. vīnum from a supposedly inherited Italic form *u̯ei̯no- < IE *u̯ei̯(h₁)-no-, because late Lat. ī (ca. 200 bc) < *ei̯ cannot be responsible for the attestations with <i> = /ī/ occurring in Ancient Italy since the middle of the first millennium bc like Falisc. UINO etc. (see above §§5.1–2). Even if we assume an early borrowing from Latin at the stage of an older phonetic shape *u̯ei̯nom or start from *u̯ei̯nom as the Common Italic form underlying the attestations in the individual Italic languages, in Faliscan, Umbrian and Volscian this form would not lead to the attested form /vīnom/, but to *u̯ēnom (cf. Falisc. hec = Lat. hīc, OLat. heic < loc. *gʰei̯-ke, Umbr. eetu /ētu/ = Lat. ītō < imptv. *ei̯-tōd; see Beekes 1987: 22 with reference to Blümel 1972: 33–34 for the representation of diphthongs in the Italic languages).

### 5.8

As a result of the historically identifiable spread of viticulture to the North, Lat. vīnum was borrowed in turn into Celtic as the source of OIr. fín, Welsh gwin and into Germanic as the source of Goth. wein, OE wīn, OHG wīn, which as a borrowing underlies OCS vino and Lith. vỹnas (IEW 1121). On the basis of compounds such as Goth. weina-gards, OE wīn-geard, OHG wīn-garto ‘vineyard’ and OCS vinjaga ‘grape’, vinogradъ ‘vineyard’, Gamkrelidze and Ivanov (1995:

557–558 with nn. 59, 60) suppose, however, that these are inherited forms from IE with their first compound member being genetically identical with Lat. vīnum, but not borrowed, and thus going back to IE *u̯ei̯no- or alternatively *u̯īno-. However, these Germanic and Slavonic compound forms are certainly not of Proto-Germanic or Proto- Slavonic origin, but merely Common Germanic and Common Slavonic formations respectively and therefore young enough to contain word forms of the individual language branches, which are based on borrowings from Lat. vīnum.

## 6. Reconstruction

### 6.1

<!-- source-page: 212 -->

The evidence of the forms for ‘wine’ and ‘grapevine’ in the individual IE languages allows (in modification of the basic analysis by Beekes 1987: 24–25) the reconstruction of an amphikinetic nomen agentis (genus commune = masc./ fem.) of the type *spéḱ-on- ‘scout, spy, lookout’ (> YAv. spasan-, OHG speho): PIE *u̯éi̯h₁-on- (nom.sg. *u̯éi̯h₁-ō(n))/obl. *u̯ih₁-n-́/loc. *u̯ih₁-én ‘twiner, creeping plant, tendril, grapevine’ from the verbal root *u̯i̯eh₁- ‘to wind around, to twine around’. (For PIE origin of the athematic n-stem meaning ‘grapevine’, see also Gorton 2014 with nn. 74–92; 2017: 2–8, 17–19.) The base form of the strong stem **u̯i̯éh₁-on- → *u̯éi̯h₁-on- shows Schwebeablaut before a vowel-initial suffix.

For prevocalic Schwebeablaut of a root morpheme containing a resonant in the onset and ending in a laryngeal, cf. inj.aor. *bʰ(u)u̯eh₂-s/t > OLat. subj. (nē) fuās, fuat ‘you shall / (s)he shall (not) be’ against subj.aor. *bʰéu̯h₂-e-ti > pres. Ved. bhávati ‘(s)he will be, becomes’; *pleh₁- ‘fill (oneself)’ in Gr. πίμπλημι ‘I fill’, πλήθω ‘I fill myself, become full’, Lat. plēnus ‘full’ against *pólh₁-u/*pélh₁-u- ‘fullness’ ntr. > Gr. πολύ ntr. → πολύς ‘much’, Goth. filu ntr. ‘much’.

Cf. lipp 2009b: 150–151 n. 62 with further refs.

A lexicalisation with similar semantics is to be seen in the verbal noun *u̯i̯éh₁-ti-/*u̯ih₁-téi̯- ‘the twining (around)’ → ‘twining twig, tendril, flexible branch’ = Lat. vītis ‘tendril, grapevine’ (by poetic metonymy ‘wine’), Lith. vytìs ‘willow rod’. In proportional analogy to the zero grade *u̯ih₁-, a phonotactically renewed full grade *u̯ei̯h₁- corresponding to the normal root type CeR(H)- was introduced in YAv. vaēiti- ‘willow rod’ < *u̯éi̯h₁-ti- etc. (on the paradigmatic conditioning of the reshaped apophony, cf. Neri 2017: 324–325 with further refs.); perhaps the related form *u̯éi̯h₁-on- ‘twiner, grapevine’ (with prevocalic Schwebeablaut) also exerted some analogical influence.

### 6.2

<!-- source-page: 213 -->

It is possible that the type of nomina agentis like *spéḱ-on-, *u̯éi̯h₁-on- results from the hypostasis of locatives with postposition *-en, thus *spéḱ-on- ‘scout, lookout’ = ‘being at looking out’ from loc. *spéḱ-en or *speḱ-én ‘at looking out’ (from a root noun *spéḱ-/*speḱ-́ ‘looking out’); hence *u̯éi̯h₁-on- ‘twiner, creeping plant’ = ‘being at twining, creeping around’ from loc. *u̯ih₁-én ‘at twining, creeping around’ (from a root noun *u̯i̯éh₁-/*u̯ih₁-́ ‘the twining, creeping around’; see below §9.2). Under this perspective, the phonotactically regularised full grade of the root in *u̯éi̯h₁-on- would be due to its derivation from the zero-grade-containing form of the loc. *u̯ih₁-én (the locative also providing the basis for the nominal stem *u̯ih₁-én-, nom.sg. *u̯ih₁-ḗn ‘(stock) being at the grapevine’ > Proto-Greek *u̯ii̯ḗn > Gk. υἱήν Hesychius = *ϝιήν ‘vine-stock’; see below §8). For the type of derivation, cf. loc. *dhǵhm-én ‘on the earth’ (> Ved. jmán) → *dhǵhém-on-/*dhǵhm-n- ‘human being’ = ‘earthling, being on the earth’ (> Lat. homō, -inis etc.; cf. Nussbaum 1986: 187–190, 289–291, Lipp 2009b: 115–132 with further refs., Lipp forthcoming: §9.1.1). A similar derivation has been proposed by Neri (2017: 324 n. 181), who takes Hitt. u̯ii̯an- ‘wine’ as the substantivised continuant of the adjectival hypostasis *u̯ih₁-on- ‘belonging to the grapevine’ from the locative *u̯ih₁-én ‘at the grapevine’ (belonging to a root noun *u̯ói̯h₁-/*u̯ih₁-́ ‘twining plant’ = ‘willow; grapevine’). Apart from the fact that the root had the primary shape *u̯i̯eh₁-forming a verifiable root noun *u̯i̯éh₁-/*u̯ih₁-́ ‘the wrapping’ (see below §§9.1, 9.2), one has to keep in mind, however, that the primary meaning of Hitt. u̯ii̯an-and Luw. u̯ii̯an-ī-/u̯in-ī- (with ī-mutation in nom. + acc.) < *u̯ih₁-on- was ‘grapevine’, the meaning ‘wine’ in the case of Hitt. u̯ii̯an(-a)- being secondary due to metonymy or hypostasis of the genitive (‘that of the grapevine’) or conditioned by derivation in the case of Luw. u̯in-ī- (obl.) ‘wine’ < u̯in-ii̯a- ‘pertaining to a grapevine’ (see above §§1.1, 1.1.1, 1.2 and below §7.1).

## 7. Morphological Representation of the Word for ‘Grapevine’ in Anatolian

### 7.1

PIE *u̯éi̯h₁-on-/loc. *u̯ih₁-én/obl. *u̯ih₁-n-́ led by generalisation of the zero grade of the root to Pre-Proto-Anatolian *u̯íh₁-on-/*u̯ih₁-én(-i)/*u̯ih₁-n-́ > Proto-Anatolian *u̯íi̯on-/*u̯ii̯én(-i)/*u̯ī̆n- ‘grapevine’ > Hittite u̯ii̯an- ‘grapevine’ and ‘wine’, the latter either by metonymy as *‘product from grapevine’ or by hypostasis from gen. u̯ii̯an-aš ‘(that) of the grapevine’ displaying a thematic stem u̯ii̯an-a-* in the meaning ‘wine’ (the meaning ‘wine’ in Hittite then being restricted to the derivative; but the existence of a separate derivative u̯ii̯an-a-* ‘wine’ cannot be ascertained due to the ambiguity of the paradigmatic forms attested, see above §§1.1, 1.1.1, 1.1.3). Luwian u̯ii̯an-ī-/u̯in-ī- ‘grapevine’ either displays Luw. ī-mutation in nom. + acc. of the genus commune on the basis of the strong stem (partially with Luw. contraction ii̯a > i), or alternatively continues a hypostasis in the meaning ‘vine-stock’ = ‘(stock) being at the grapevine, (plant) consisting of grapevine’ from the locative *u̯ii̯éni ‘at/in the grapevine’ > Luw. u̯ii̯ani (with é > Luw. a).

### 7.2

<!-- source-page: 214 -->

For the Luwian formation, one can compare the ī-mutation in an athematic stem like nom.acc. PIE *dʰéǵʰ-ōm ‘earth’ (→ Post-PIE *dʰǵʰṓm > Gr. χθών etc.) > Proto-Anatolian *dégom (genus commune; Hitt. <te-e-kán> = /dḗgan/ ntr. secondary) → Pre-Proto-Luwian *deγom-ī́+s/m (with animate-marker *-ī́ in genus commune as relic of *-ih₂/*-i̯éh₂- corresponding to the type Ved. dev-ī́/gen. dev-yā́s f. ‘goddess’) > nom. *dei̯om-ī́-s, acc. *dei̯om-ī́-m (intervocalic loss of g > γ with insertion of i̯ as hiatus filler after front vowel), whence by analogy dat.loc. *dei̯om-í > Proto-Luwian nom. *dii̯amm-ī́-s, acc. *dii̯amm-ī́-n, dat.-loc. *dii̯amm-í (raising of pretonic e to i; fortis realisation resp. gemination of the nasal before following accent) > CLuw. nom. tii̯ammiš, acc. tii̯ammin, dat.-loc. tii̯ammi = /dii̯ammī́s/, /dii̯ammī́n/, /dii̯ammí/. But for this Luwian word for ‘earth’, there is also the alternative analysis as a locative hypostasis (Kimball 1994a: 78, 84–85 with n. 29), thus loc. PIE *dʰǵʰém(-i) > Proto-Anatolian *dəgém(i) > 1. loc. Hitt. tagān = /dagā́n/ ‘on the earth/ground’, 2. locative Pre-

Proto-Luwian *dəγém(i) > *dəi̯ém(mi) (palatalization of velar or rather intervocalic loss of g > γ with insertion of i̯ as hiatus filler before front vowel; nasal gemination according to Lex Čop) > Proto-Luwian *dii̯ám(mi) ‘on the earth/ ground’ → hypostasis CLuw. tii̯ammi- = /dii̯ámmi-/ c. ‘earth, land, ground’ (= *‘being located on the earth’?). (See Lipp 2009b: 56–60 with further refs.).

### 7.3

<!-- source-page: 215 -->

For the Anatolian forms, Oettinger (2003: 143–144) offers however the following hypothesis based on the assumption that their sound shape was conditioned by Anatolian vowel breaking: PIE *u̯ói̯h₁no- ‘wine’ (= Greek οἶνος m.) > Proto-Anatolian *u̯ēno- > Hitt. u̯ii̯ana- (breaking); *u̯ói̯h₁no- ‘wine’ → *u̯ói̯h₁ni-‘grapevine’ > Proto-Anatolian *u̯ēni- > Luw. *u̯īni- > HLuw. u̯ii̯ani- (breaking), by restitution also u̯īni-. But in this scenario it remains unclear under which conditions the breaking of ē and ī (as against their preservation in other lexemes and paradigms) and the partial restitution of inherited ī take place (no conditioning by accent, chronological or dialectal distribution being recognizable; for the material, see above §§1.1, 1.2). On the other hand, vowel breaking must indeed be admitted as an irregular phenomenon, e.g. CLuw. mii̯asa- ntr. ‘flesh’ (nom.acc. mi-i̯a-ša-an-za = /mii̯asantsa/) beside misa- ntr. ‘id.’ = /mīsa-/ (nom.acc. mi-i-ša-an-za, mi-ša-an-za = /mīsantsa/) < *mēs-a- < PIE *mḗs ntr. < **mḗm-s ~ PIE *mēms-ó- (Ved. mā́s- ~ māṁs-á-, Goth. mimz ntr. etc.; interpretation and etymological analysis of CLuw. mi(i̯a)sa- according to Poetto 1995: 30, 34–35; for the attestations, cf. also Melchert 1993: 149, ACLT s.v. CLuw. mi(ya)sa- ntr. ‘flesh’). But one has to keep in mind that the Hittite form of the word for ‘grapevine’ is represented by the athematic n-stem u̯ii̯an-, and the Hittite word for ‘wine’ is either identical with it due to metonymic extension of the denotation or represents a thematic hypostasis u̯ii̯an-a-* based on u̯ii̯an-(the underlying stem formation of the attested paradigmatic forms being ambiguous, see above §§1.1, 1.1.1, 1.1.3). For the explanation of the Anatolian forms, one therefore has to start from an inherited athematic base form *u̯ii̯an- in the meaning ‘grapevine’ (not ‘wine’), and this form cannot be derived from a thematic form *u̯ói̯h₁no- corresponding to Gr. οἶνος ‘wine’ and containing preconsonantal *oi̯ in the root morpheme, which would provide the starting point for the alleged Anatolian phonological development consisting of the monophthongization of the diphthong to *ē (> *ī) and subsequent vowel breaking to *ii̯a (and †u̯oi̯(h₁)-n- as an independent athematic stem of the genus commune is neither morphologically nor apophonically admissible). But in this respect H.C. Melchert (p.c.; similarly already Gérard 2009: 20) has pointed out as a decisive argument that before coronal continuants, the inherited diphthong *oi̯ was not monophthongized in Anatolian, but according to Kimball was retained as ai̯ in Hittite (as exemplified for the position before n or tautosyllabic s, just as also inherited *ou̯ and *au̯ were not monophthongized before resonants; Kimball 1994b: 14–22, 13–14, Kimball 1999: 216, 225–226; followed by Melchert 1994: 148 with the assumption of a broader context of preservation of the respective diphthongs before coronal continuants). Therefore, the presumed *oi̯ cannot provide the monophthongization product *ē as input for the vowel breaking to *ii̯a. For the precoronal retention of ai̯ < *oi̯, cf. Hitt. LÚkaina- ‘relative by marriage’ < PIE *ḱói̯-no- (cf. Ved. śéva- ‘friendly, dear’, OHG hīwa, Latv. siẽva ‘wife’ < *ḱéi̯-u̯o-/u̯eh₂-, OIr. coím ‘dear’ < *ḱói̯-mo-); Hitt. šuu̯aiš ‘bird’ < *su̯oi̯-s (with shortening by Osthoff’s law) < PIE *su̯ṓi̯-s, nom. of *(s)h₂u̯ói̯-/*(s)h₂u̯éi̯- (Ved. váy-, nom. vés, Lat. avis).

### 7.4

<!-- source-page: 216 -->

Hitt. /u̯ii̯an-/ c. ‘wine; grape-vine’ < Proto-Anatolian *u̯íi̯on- < *u̯íh₁-on- with gen.sg. Hitt. GEŠTIN-i̯a-na-aš = u̯i5-i̯a-na-aš < *u̯íi̯on-os, instr.sg. Hitt. ú-i-i̯a-an-ta < *u̯íi̯on-d̥ shows generalization of the stem formant *-on- after the strong stem of the amphikinetic paradigm Proto-Anatolian *u̯íi̯on-/*u̯ī̆n-́ < *u̯íh₁-on-/ *u̯ih₁-n-́. A comparable paradigmatic structure is offered by Hitt. nom.sg. ḫāraš, acc.sg. ḫāranan → gen.sg. ḫāranaš ‘eagle’ (for the Hittite paradigm, cf. Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 111–112) with apophonic levelling within the original amphikinetic paradigm PIE *h₃ér-on-: obliquus *h₃r̥-n-́ (nom.sg. PIE *h₃ér-ō(n) = *[h₃ór-ō̃] > Proto-Anatolian *h₃óro+s > Hitt. ḫāraš). The original apophony of the stem formant is reflected by OHG aro ‘eagle’ < Proto- Germanic *ar-ō̃ < PIE *h₃ér-ō(n): OHG arn < *arn-i-, ON ǫrn < *arn-u- ‘id.’ < Proto- Germanic *ar-n- ← *ur-n- < PIE *h₃r̥-n-́. (For the apophonic structure of the paradigm of *h₃ér-on-‘eagle’, see Harðarson 1987: 118–122 and also Melchert 1983: 8–9, 10, Zucha 1988: 170–171, 172–173.) The original PIE paradigm underlying Hitt. /u̯ii̯an-/ c. ‘wine; grapevine’ thus was neither protero- nor hysterokinetic. This also becomes clear from the diverging paradigm structure in the following two examples. (1) Hitt. išḫiman-/išḫimen- c. ‘cord, rope’ with nom.sg. išḫimāš, acc.sg.

išḫimanan → išḫimenan (on the analogy of the oblique stem as in unattested gen.sg. išḫimenaš*; for the Hittite paradigm, seeō Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 111–112) on the basis of a proterokinetic paradigm *sh₂éi̯-̃] →

mon-: obl. *sh₂i-mén- with nom.sg. *sh₂éi̯-mō(n) = *[sh₂ái̯-mō Proto-Anatolian *sh₂i-mṓ+s > Hitt. išḫimāš (= OSax. sīmo, OE sīma ‘rope’ < Proto-Germanic *sīmō̃ < *sih₂-mō̃ with laryngeal metathesis and probably analogical suffix accent after acc.sg. *sih₂-món-m̥ < *sh₂i-món-m̥). For the stem formation, cf. Gr. ἱμονιά ‘well-rope’ < *simon-i̯ā, due to a remodelling in the acc.sg. *sh₂i-món-m̥ ← PIE *sh₂ei̯-món-m̥ = *[sh₂ai̯-món-m̥ ] < **sh₂éi̯-mon-m̥ under the influence of the oblique stem PIE *sh₂i-mén-, likewise displaying suffix accent.

On the PIE accent shift in trisyllabic words with the vowel structure é-o-V → e-ó-V as in the case of the PIE numeral *ku̯etu̯óres m. ‘four’ < **ku̯étu̯ores, the so-called “ku̯etu̯óres rule” postulated by Klingenschmitt, cf. Lipp 2009b: 96 with n. 143 and further refs. For the apo phonic structure of the paradigm, see Harðarson 1987: 118–122, partially different Melchert 1983: 10, Zucha 1988: 170–171 with n. 28; 172–173.

(2) Hitt. ištanzan- c. ‘soul’ with nom.sg. ZI-an-za = ištanza*, gen.sg. ištanzanaš

based on a hysterokinetic paradigm *pst-én-: obl. *pst-n-́ with nom.sg. *pst-ḗn > Proto-Anatolian *stḗn+s > Hitt. ištanza*. For the etymology, cf. Ved. stána- m., YAv. fštāna- m., Arm. stin ‘female breast’, Gr. στήνιον· στῆθος (Hesychius) ‘breast’.

For the apophonic structure, see Harðarson 1987: 118–122 on the basis of the etymological analysis by Eichner 1973: 98 n. 78, which however has been disputed by HED i/ii 471, Kloekhorst 2008: 415, cf. EWAia ii 752.

## 8. The Inherited Greek Word for ‘Grapevine’

By hypostasis of the locative *u̯ih₁-én ‘at/in the grapevine/tendril’ in the prehistory of Greek there was formed a new nominal stem *u̯ih₁-én-, nom.sg. *u̯ih₁-ḗn ‘(stock) being at the grapevine, (plant) consisting of grapevine/tendril’ > Proto-Gr. *u̯ii̯ḗn > Gr. υἱήν, ἢ υἱόν· τὴν ἄμπελον (Hesychius), to be interpreted as *ϝιήν ‘grapevine, vine-stock’. For the internal derivation, cf. Ved. RV+ pári-jman- adj. ‘being all around, ubiquitous’ ← RV pári-jman adv. ‘all around’ < *pári ǰmán loc. ‘all around on earth’ (RV jmán loc. ‘on earth’).

<!-- source-page: 217 -->

A comparable constellation of internal derivation based on a locative (without derivational suffix) can be seen in the s-stem *h₂ép-os/ *h₂ep-és- ntr. ‘work, opus’ with loc. *h₂ep-és(-i) ‘at work’ > Ved. ápas/apás-‘work’ with loc. apási and in the adjectival hypostasis (derived from the locative) *h₂ep-és- ‘being at work’ (nom.sg. *h₂ep-ḗs), continued in the Ved. adjective apás- ‘working, active’. For the vocalism of the derivative, cf. Gr. ψευδής ‘lying, false’ as derivative of the s-stem ψεῦδος ntr. ‘lie, falsehood’ with dative ψεύδει < loc. *-és-i.

See lipp 2009b: 120 with further refs., following j. schindler

## 9. Etymological Connections of the PIE Word for ‘Grapevine’

### 9.1

PIE *u̯éi̯h₁-on- ‘twiner, creeping plant, grapevine’ is a nomen agentis based on the verbal root *u̯i̯eh₁- ‘to wind around, to twine around’ (LIV2: 695), which is represented e.g. in the thematic aor. Ved. ávyat ‘has enwrapped’ ← root aor. 3 pl. *u̯i̯ánt, remodelled on the stem of root aor.sg. *u̯i̯ā́- < PIE *u̯i̯éh₁- from 3.pl. *u̯ii̯ánt < PIE *u̯ih₁-ént, further in pres. Ved. vyáyati ‘enwraps’ ← *u̯ii̯ái̯a- (after aor. vya- ← *u̯i̯āÎ-) = Lat. vieō, -ēre ‘to bind, twist’ < iterative *u̯ih₁-éi̯e/o- (noncoloration of the stem suffix proves *h₁ and excludes *h₂ as final root consonant: †u̯ih₂-éi̯e- > †u̯ih₂ai̯e- > Lat. †viāre), and in Lith. vejù (výti) ‘to wind’ < *u̯éi̯h₁-e/o- ← **u̯i̯éh₁-e/o- (Schwebeablaut before vowel-initial suffix, see above §6.1). From Ved. vyáyati ‘enwraps’ ← PIE *u̯ih₁-éi̯e/o- one has to distinguish etymologically the phonologically and semantically similar verb in pres. Ved. váyati ‘weaves’ < PIE *Hu̯-éi̯e/o-, perf. Ved. ūvur ‘they have woven’ (< *Hu-Hu̯-ŕ̥s ← *He-Hu̯-ŕ̥s), verbal adj. vy-ùta- ‘woven’ from *Heu̯-, further Lith. áudžiu, áusti ‘to weave’ < *Heu̯-d- (LIV2: 224).

### 9.2

<!-- source-page: 218 -->

In Avestan, the related root noun viiā- is still attested occasionally in the basic (i.e. not derivationally conditioned) lexical meaning ‘wrapping, envelopment’. The acc.sg. OAv. viiąm is measured as bisyllabic (either /u̯i̯a'am/ as reflex of PIE *u̯i̯éh₁-m̥ or /u̯ii̯ām/ as lexicalised Lindeman variant from PIE *u̯(i)i̯ḗm < **u̯i̯éh₁-m, if Stang’s law applied not only to **°ah₂m > *°ām, but also to **°eh₁m > *°ēm; on occasional reflexes of Sievers and Lindeman variants in Old Avestan, see Schindler 1977: 58–59, cf. Lipp 2009b: 357 n. 18): Yasna 48,7 b-c yōi ā vaŋhə̄uš manaŋhō dīdraγžō.duiiē // aṣ̌ā viiąm ‘you, who wish to tighten the envelopment of good thinking in accordance with the right order’. Further forms of the loc.pl. occur in Yašt 13,11 f-g viiāhuua uruuat̰.caēm astica gaonaca ‘in the wombs (= envelopments) I put together bones and hairs’; Yašt 8,9 b–d satauuaēsō…viiāhuua yat̰ jasaiti ‘when (the rain-bringing star) Satavaēsa goes to his hiding places (= shells, envelopments by the clouds)’ (cf. Humbach 1959: 78, Schindler 1972: 70, Kellens 1984: 56, 340, Kellens and Pirart 1988: 170; 1990: 308; 1991: 224, Humbach 1991: 201–202). In PIE this particular root noun was probably a nomen actionis with the meaning ‘wrapping, envelopment’, which displayed mobile accent and therefore the stem allomorphs *u̯i̯éh₁-/*u̯ih₁-́ (i.e. not the acrostatic pattern †u̯i̯óh₁-/†u̯i̯éh₁- of a nomen agentis or resultativum), and therefore the Hesychius gloss Gr. γίς· ἱμάς ‘belt’ taken as *ϝίς = */u̯ī́s/ < Pre-Proto-Gr. *u̯íh₁-s ‘the wrapping’ (← PIE *u̯i̯éh₁-s) can be connected as a formation with generalised zero grade of the root.

## 10. Morphological Representation of the Words for ‘Wine’ in Italic and Greek

### 10.1

Lat. vīnum, Falisc. /vīnom/, Umbr. /vīnom/ ‘wine’ etc. < Proto-Italic *u̯īno- < PIE *u̯ih₁no- is derivationally analysable as *u̯ih₁-n-ó-, i.e. an original adjectival possessive derivation based on the oblique (weak) stem of PIE *u̯éi̯h₁-on-/obl. *u̯ih₁-n-́ ‘grapevine, tendril’ (stem variant as in Luw. /u̯in-ī-/ ‘wine’ < u̯in-ii̯a- < *u̯īn-ii̯ó- ‘pertaining to a grapevine’; see above §1.2), which has the derivational meaning ‘having/containing grapevine, consisting of grapevine’ → neuter ‘Rebensaft: grape juice, must, wine’ (in Italic lexicalised as a noun). For possessive adjectives derived from the oblique stem, cf. Ved. tamasá- ‘dark-coloured’ < *temH-es-ó- ‘having darkness, consisting of darkness’ belonging to Ved. támas-‘darkness’ ntr. < PIE *témH-os/*temH-és- ← *témH-os/*tm̥ H-és-, and Gr. βιός m. ‘bow’ < *gu̯ih₂-ó- ‘having a tendon/string, provided with a tendon’ to Ved. jyā́- f. < *gu̯i̯éh₂-/*gu̯ih₂-́ ‘tendon’.

<!-- source-page: 219 -->

For Italic possessive derivatives based on the oblique stem, cf. Lat. salvus ‘sound, unharmed’ = Osc. σαλαϝσ, SALAVS, Umbr. saluom, saluuom (< Proto-Sabellic *salau̯o-) < Proto-Italic *salau̯o- = OP fra-haravam adv. ‘entirely, altogether’ < Indo-Iranian *sər-au̯-á- < *sr̥H-au̯-á- < PIE *[sl̥h₂au̯ó-] = *sl̥h₂-eu̯-ó- (accent like Gr. κενεός ‘empty’ < *ken-eu̯ó-). These forms are etymologically related to CLuw. šalḫitti- ‘growth’ < *sl̥h₂-i-ti- to Hitt. šalli-, CLuw. šalḫa/i- ‘grown, adult’ ← adj. *sélh₂-i-/*sl̥h₂-éi̯-. PIE *sl̥h₂-eu̯-ó- in the meaning ‘having health/welfare’ is a possessive formation based on the oblique stem of the neuter noun *sólh₂-u/obl. *sl̥h₂-éu̯- ‘health, welfare’ (← *sólh₂-u/obl. *sélh₂-u-, originally belonging to the acrostatic type *ǵón-u/obl. *ǵén-u- → *ǵn-éu̯- ‘knee’). This noun is continued 1. by the Italic noun *sal-u-/*sal-ou̯- ← *sl̥h₂-u-/*sl̥h₂-au̯- (← PIE *sólh₂-u/*sl̥h₂-éu̯-) as base of the secondary Lat. salūs, -ūtis ‘health, welfare’ < *salou̯-ti-; and 2. by the Ved. adverb pra-salaví ‘entirely, altogether’ < Proto-Indo-Iranian loc. *sar-áu̯-i belonging to *sár-u/*sar-áu̯- < *sálH-u/*salH-áu̯- < *sólh₂-u/*solh₂-áu̯- (← PIE *sólh₂-u/*sl̥h₂-éu̯-; see Lipp 2009b: 339–341 and nn. 64, 66 for refs.).

### 10.2

#### 10.2.1

<!-- source-page: 220 -->

Gr. οἶνος m. ‘wine’, Myc. wo-no = /u̯oi̯no-/ etc. < Proto-Gr. *u̯ói̯no- < PIE *u̯ói̯(h₁)no- (laryngeal loss according to Lex Saussure, see above §2) is analysable in its derivation as *u̯ói̯h₁-n-o- ‘Rebensaft: grape juice, must, wine’ ← *u̯oi̯h₁-n-ó- ‘having/containing grapevine, consisting of grapevine’, i.e. as an early substantivisation of an archaic adjectival possessive formation, characterised by o-grade of the root and initial accent. The adjectival possessive formation *u̯oi̯h₁-n-ó- is probably derived from the strong stem of PIE *u̯éi̯h₁-on-/obl. *u̯ih₁-n-́ ‘tendril, grapevine’ (by paradigmatic levelling Pre-Proto-Anatolian *u̯ih₁-on- > Hitt. u̯ii̯an(a)- ‘grapevine; wine’); morphologically and functionally comparable is e.g. Goth. hals, Lat. collum, OLat. collus ‘neck’ < *kólso- (k < ku̯ by delabialisation before rounded vowel o) < PIE *ku̯ólso- ‘joint for a turning motion’ ← *ku̯olsó- (Lex Saussure: oR.C < oRH.C, see above §§2, 3) < *ku̯olh₁-s-ó-‘having a turning motion, performing a turning motion’ as derivative of the verbal noun *ku̯élh₁-os/-és- ntr. ‘turning (motion)’ > Gr. τέλος ‘end’ = *‘turning point’. The archaic formation of the underlying possessive adjectives *u̯oi̯h₁-n-ó- and *ku̯olh₁-s-ó- shows a morphonologically conditioned o-grade of the root morpheme, which was unaccented in the derivative, but accented in the derivational bases *u̯éi̯h₁-on- c. and *ku̯élh₁-os ntr. respectively. Such derivations might have provided a prototype for substantivisations with the vr̥ddhi vowel *-o- (for such analyses, see below §10.2.2). From these formations, one must however distinguish younger and more frequent possessive formations with e-grade of the root like possibly *ku̯elh₁-s-ó- ‘having a turning point, being at the turning point’ (> Welsh pell ‘far’, on which see Neri’s different analysis in the next paragraph); cf. the derivation from the base *ḱér-u- ‘horn, point’ (> Ved. śáru- f. RV ‘arrow, spear’) in the case of PIE *ḱer-u̯-ó- ‘having horns, horned’ or *ḱér-u̯-o- ‘animal having horns, horned animal’ > Lat. cervus ‘stag, deer’ beside a probably older and therefore already Pre-PIE formation *kor-u̯-ó- ‘having horns, horned’ → PIE *kór-u̯-o- ‘horned animal, cattle’ (early lexicalised form without later satem palatalisation like in the base form *ḱér-u- < **kér-u-) → Balto-Slavic *kṓru̯-ā- f. ‘cow’ (vr̥ddhi derivation meaning *‘the female belonging to the horned animal’) > RussCS krava, Lith. kárvė (< *-ii̯ā-) ‘id.’ (on the formation type, see Lipp 2009a: 14 and n. 21; 60–61 and n. 161 with further refs., Lipp forthcoming: §9.3.2; Lat. corvus ‘crow, raven’ could be related as *‘animal with horny beak’ from *kór-u̯-o- ‘horned animal’, but in general an onomatopoetic origin is assumed for this form).

For substantivisation with initial accent, cf. the derivations PIE *u̯l̥ku̯ó-‘dangerous’ (Ved. a-vr̥ká- ‘harmless’ = *‘undangerous’ and Hitt. u̯alku(u̯)a- ntr. ‘monstrosity’, if not from *u̯élku̯o- ‘the dangerous thing’) → PIE *u̯lÎ̥ku̯o- ‘dangerous animal’ (Luw. u̯alu̯a-/u̯alu̯i- ‘lion’, Ved. vŕ̥ka-, Gr. λύκος etc. ‘wolf’), Ved. kr̥ṣṇá- ‘black’ → kŕ̥ṣṇa- ‘black antelope’, *anná- ‘eaten’ → ánna- ‘food’, Gr. λευκός ‘white’ → λεῦκος ‘white fish’, λεύκη ‘abele, white poplar’, δολιχός ‘long’ → δόλιχος ‘long run’ (cf. Lipp 2009b: 144–145 with refs.). For the substantivisation of a possessive formation, cf. (as derivative of *rót-o- ‘the running, the rolling motion/device’ = OHG rad ‘wheel’ etc. → *rót-h₂/*rot-éh₂- ‘roller, wheel’ = Lat. rota ‘wheel’) the possessive adj. *roth₂-ó- ‘having wheels’ → substantive *róth₂-o- ‘chariot’ = Ved. rátha-, Av. raθa- ‘chariot’ (see Lipp 2009b: 387 n. 87; 453 with refs.).

#### 10.2.2

<!-- source-page: 221 -->

A different derivation for Gr. οἶνος m. ‘wine’ < *u̯ói̯(h₁)no- is proposed by Neri (2017: 324 n. 181), who regards it as a barytone substantivisation with o-grade on the basis of a vṛddhi derivative *u̯ei̯h₁-n-ó- ‘belonging to the grapevine’, i.e. as a formation like the aforementioned (but in 10.2.1. differently analysed) form Goth. hals ‘neck’ < Germ. *h(w)alsa- < *ku̯ól(h₁)-s-o- ← *ku̯elh₁-s-ó- ‘having a turning motion/point’ > Welsh pell ‘far’ (= *‘having a turning point, being at the turning point’), and Lith. žãstas (2) ‘upper arm’ < *ǵhós-to- ← *ǵhes-tó- ‘belonging to the hand’. In Neri’s analysis, *u̯ei̯h₁-n-ó- is a thematic hypostasis of a locative *u̯ih₁-én ‘at the grapevine’ (→ *u̯ih₁-on- ‘belonging to the grapevine’ > Hitt. u̯ii̯an- ‘wine’) from a root noun *u̯ói̯h₁-/*u̯ih₁-́ ‘twining plant’ = ‘willow; grapevine’ (the existence of which cannot be ascertained, however; see above §§6.2, 9.2). According to Gippert (1994: 119 n. 16), on the other hand, Gr. οἶνος m. ‘wine’ < *u̯ói̯no- < *u̯ói̯(H)no- continues a substantivisation with secondary o-grade vṛddhi in the meaning ‘grape’ = ‘the fruit belonging to the twining plant/grape-vine’, which is derived from the verbal adjective *u̯iH-nó- ‘twined’, whose neuter form meaning ‘twining plant, grapevine’ is continued by Lat. vīnum ‘wine’. The Armenian form gini, gen. ginwoy ‘wine’ < *u̯ēnii̯o- < *u̯oi̯(H)nio- is assumed to be an -io- derivative from *u̯ói̯(H)no- ‘grape’ with the meaning ‘wine’ as designation for the product made from grapes. The Anatolian forms like Hitt. u̯ii̯an(a)- ‘grapevine; wine’ would however be based on different derivations from the respective verbal root.

## 11. The Semitic Evidence

<!-- source-page: 222 -->

The earliest attestations of Semitic *u̯ai̯nu ‘wine’ are represented by the Old Cannaanite forms i̯e-nu, i̯e-ni (14th c. bc) from Akkadian diplomatic texts in the Egyptian archive of Tell el-Amarna. In the textual tradition of the respective Semitic languages there are the following attestations: Ugaritic yn = /yēnu/ ‘wine’ (13th c. bc; cf. Aistleitner 1967: 130–131 Nr. 1183, del Olmo Lete and Sanmartín 2003: 968–971, for the retrieval of the forms, see Zemánek 1995: esp. 121–122), Phoenician yn = /yēn/, Old Aramaic yyn, Hebrew yyn, vocalised yayin (Samaritan Ostraca yn = /yēn/), Ammonite yn = /yēn/ ‘wine’ (each of these forms showing the Northwest Semitic change of initial *u̯- > i̯-); Old Sabaean wyn, yyn ‘vineyard’ (with vacillation between u̯- and i̯-); Ethiopic (Geʻez) wayən ‘wine, grapevine, vineyard’; further only occasionally attested Arabian wayn ‘black grapes’. (On the Semitic forms and their possible interdependence with IE and non-IE forms, cf. Brown 1969: 147–148, Koehler and Baumgartner 1974: 391, Cohen 1996: 534, Lipiński 1997: 561, Zamora 2000: 269, 270, 274, Leslau 2006: 623, Aspesi 2013, Gorton 2014 with nn. 28–38, 105–111; assumption of a borrowing from Hittite by Rabin 1963: 138–139, unconvincing attempt at an etymological connection of the lexeme within Semitic by van Selms 1974, which is rejected by Aspesi 2013: 6 with n. 22, Gorton 2014 with n. 37). The lexeme in question is represented only in West Semitic, not in East Semitic, as the traditionally connected form Akkad. inu appears only in Young Babylonian lexicographical lists and as such is not old and also of unknown meaning (CAD 7: 152 s.v. inu C, 157 s.v. īnu 1.(e)l, Rabin 1963: 138 n. 8 versus AHw I 383). Since ancient times, the normal expression in East Semitic for ‘wine’ has been Akkad. karānu (also ‘grape, grapevine’), often rendered by the Sumerian logogram GEŠTIN. And because of the phonotactic structure of its potential root element (*u̯i̯n), *u̯ai̯nu is also without an inner-Semitic etymological connection. But also as a borrowing it would not be derivable from the Anatolian forms Hitt. u̯ii̯an(a)- ‘wine; grapevine’, HLuv. u̯ii̯ani-, u̯ini- ‘grapevine’ (< *u̯ih₁-on-/*u̯ih₁-n-; see above §§1.1, 1.1.1, 1.2, 7.1). The following hypothesis, however, might offer a solution: The lexeme *u̯ai̯nu could have been borrowed into Northwest Semitic (Ugaritic + Aramaic + Canaanite [= Phoenician, Hebrew, Moabitic, Ammonite]) around 1500 bc by way of the Levant trade from Mycenaean, where in the textual evidence of Linear B the word is attested as wo-no = /u̯oi̯no-/ ‘wine’ (> later Greek οἶνος; see above §2). As according to the evidence from Amorite names in Akkadian and Egyptian sources and from Old Syrian and Old Canaanite glosses in the correspondence from Tell el-Amarna (cf. Moscati 1964: 46) the Northwest Semitic initial change *u̯- > i̯- had already taken place by the first quarter of the second millennium bc, one can suppose that the lexeme *u̯ai̯nu as a loan form, which was taken over from Mycenaean only in the middle of the second millennium bc, would first have preserved its initial *u̯- in Northwest Semitic and as such would soon have spread from the Northwest Semitic area further within the Semitic group to the south (into North and South Arabian, Ethiopic). As by the earlier Northwest Semitic sound change *u̯- > i̯- all former instances of initial *u̯- had been removed, it is easily conceivable that after some time a secondary sound substitution of new isolated cases of initial *u̯- would have occurred as in the loanword *u̯ai̯nu ‘wine’, which therefore within Northwest Semitic changed secondarily for structural reasons into *i̯ai̯nu. Thus only in specific phonetic constellations or still later acquired lexemes was initial u̯-preserved in Northwest Semitic, as for instance in the case of the proclitic conjunction *u̯a- ‘and’ > Ugarit.Phoen. w-, Hebr.Aram. wə- corresponding to Arab. wa- and Akkad. u < *u̯a- (cf. Moscati 1964: 46, 121, Sivan 2001: 25–26).

## 12. Conclusion

<!-- source-page: 223 -->

To sum up: In historical linguistic analysis, the set of forms of the word for ‘wine’ represented in the individual Indo-European languages can be derived from a formation based on the PIE root *u̯i̯eh₁- ‘to wind around, to twine around’, i.e. a nominal nasal stem PIE *u̯éi̯h₁-on-/obl. *u̯ih₁-n-́/loc. *u̯ih₁-én ‘twiner, creeping plant, tendril, grapevine’ (with Schwebeablaut of the full grade of the root morpheme before the vowel-initial suffix). This athematic stem is continued on the one hand by Hittite u̯ii̯an- c. ‘wine; grapevine’ (whether the meaning ‘wine’ was restricted to a thematic hypostasis u̯ii̯an-a-* cannot be decided in view of the ambiguity of the paradigmatic forms attested) and Hieroglyphic Luwian u̯ii̯ani-, u̯ini- c. ‘grapevine’ (with generalized zero grade of the root). On the other hand, it provides the derivational base for the possessive formations 1. *u̯oi̯(h₁)-n-ó- ‘consisting of grapevine’ (from the strong stem *u̯éi̯h₁-on-) → noun *u̯ói̯n-o- ‘juice from grapevine, grape juice, Rebensaft’ > Greek (ϝ)οἶνος m. ‘wine’, Armenian gini ‘wine’ (< *u̯oi̯n-ii̯o-m ntr. < *u̯oi̯n-ih₂ó- ← *u̯ói̯n-o-) and 2. *u̯ih₁-n-ó- ‘consisting of grapevine’ (from the weak stem *u̯ih₁-n-́) → Proto-Italic *u̯īnom ntr. ‘juice from grapevine, grape juice, Rebensaft’ > Latin vīnum, Faliscan /vīnom/, Umbrian /vīnom/ ‘wine’; under this assumption the Etruscan form VINUN, VINUM continues a loan adopted from an Italic language no later than the 7th century bc. A debatable alternative is offered by Agostiniani’s analysis, according to which the Italic forms are borrowed from the Etruscan language, which in turn would have taken over this lexeme from Greek, i.e. Common Italic /u̯īnom/ ← Etruscan VINUN, VINUM ← accusative Greek u̯oi̯non*. The Semitic forms Ugaritic yn = /yēnu/, Phoenician yn = /yēn/, Hebrew yayin ‘wine’, etc. < *u̯ai̯nu may be based on a borrowing in the mid-2nd millennium bc from Mycenaean Greek (Linear B wo-no = /u̯oi̯no-/), whereas the source of the Caucasian forms Georgian γvino, Mingrelian gvini ‘wine’ is probably a loan acquired during the 1st millennium bc from Proto-Armenian or its prestage (Proto-Kartvelian *γu̯ini̯o ← [Pre-]Proto-Armenian *gu̯īníi̯o, gen. *gu̯īni̯ói̯o < *u̯oi̯n-ii̯o- = Armenian gini, gen. ginwoy).

## Acknowledgements

This paper presented at the Hrozný memorial conference in Prague in November 2015 is based on a joint talk given with Bela Brogyanyi at the iii Convegno irdau in Perugia and Gubbio in September 2011 (Brogyanyi and Lipp 2016). In the present version, special attention has been paid to the Anatolian and Italic evidence. For valuable advice on the formation and attestation of the words for ‘grapevine’ and ‘wine’ in Anatolian I would like to thank Craig Melchert and Massimo Poetto, who have also generously provided me with important bibliographical references. Further references I owe to Marianna Pozza. I am also indebted to Ilya Yakubovich for making accessible precious archival material, and to Luke Gorton for putting his unpublished PhD thesis at my disposal (Gorton 2014). For advice on Semitic issues, I would like to thank my department colleagues Viktor Bielický and Pavel Čech. I would also like to acknowledge the utmost care taken by the volume editor Ronald Kim in processing my typographically complex text and in improving the style of the paper. For substantial suggestions and support in providing research literature, I am grateful to my friends Bela Brogyanyi, Martin Gális and Sergio Neri. The research for this paper has been supported by the Czech Science Foundation in the form of projects GA 14-10673S and GA 14-12987S and by Charles University in Prague within the project ‘Progres 4: Language in the shiftings of time, space, and culture’.
